In olden times when wishing still helped one, there lived a kingwhose daughters were all beautiful, but the youngest was so beautifulthat the sun itself, which has seen so much, was astonished wheneverit shone in her face.  Close by the king's castle lay a great darkforest, and under an old lime-tree in the forest was a well, and whenthe day was very warm, the king's child went out into the forest andsat down by the side of the cool fountain, and when she was bored shetook a golden ball, and threw it up on high and caught it, and thisball was her favorite plaything.
Now it so happened that on one occasion the princess's golden balldid not fall into the little hand which she was holding up for it,but on to the ground beyond, and rolled straight into the water.  Theking's daughter followed it with her eyes, but it vanished, and thewell was deep, so deep that the bottom could not be seen.  At thisshe began to cry, and cried louder and louder, and could not becomforted.  And as she thus lamented someone said to her, "What ailsyou, king's daughter?  You weep so that even a stone would show pity."
She looked round to the side from whence the voice came, and saw afrog stretching forth its big, ugly head from the water.  "Ah, oldwater-splasher, is it you," she said, "I am weeping for my golden ball,which has fallen into the well."  "Be quiet, and do not weep," answeredthe frog, "I can help you, but what will you give me if I bring yourplaything up again?"  "Whatever you will have, dear frog," said she, "Myclothes, my pearls and jewels, and even the golden crown which I amwearing."  The frog answered, "I do not care for your clothes, yourpearls and jewels, nor for your golden crown, but if you will love meand let me be your companion and play-fellow, and sit by you at yourlittle table, and eat off your little golden plate, and drink out ofyour little cup, and sleep in your little bed - if you will promiseme this I will go down below, and bring you your golden ball upagain."
"Oh yes," said she, "I promise you all you wish, if you will but bringme my ball back again."  But she thought, "How the silly frog doestalk.  All he does is to sit in the water with the other frogs, andcroak.  He can be no companion to any human being."
But the frog when he had received this promise, put his head into thewater and sank down; and in a short while came swimmming up againwith the ball in his mouth, and threw it on the grass.  The king'sdaughter was delighted to see her pretty plaything once more, andpicked it up, and ran away with it.  "Wait, wait," said the frog.  "Takeme with you.  I can't run as you can."  But what did it avail him toscream his croak, croak, after her, as loudly as he could.  She didnot listen to it, but ran home and soon forgot the poor frog, who wasforced to go back into his well again.
The next day when she had seated herself at table with the king andall the courtiers, and was eating from her little golden plate,something came creeping splish splash, splish splash, up the marblestaircase, and when it had got to the top, it knocked at the door andcried, "Princess, youngest princess, open the door for me."  She ran tosee who was outside, but when she opened the door, there sat the frogin front of it.  Then she slammed the door to, in great haste, satdown to dinner again, and was quite frightened.  The king saw plainlythat her heart was beating violently, and said, "My child, what areyou so afraid of?  Is there perchance a giant outside who wants tocarry you away?"  "Ah, no," replied she.  "It is no giant but a disgustingfrog."
"What does a frog want with you?"  "Ah, dear father, yesterday as I wasin the forest sitting by the well, playing, my golden ball fell intothe water.  And because I cried so, the frog brought it out again forme, and because he so insisted, I promised him he should be mycompanion, but I never thought he would be able to come out of hiswater.  And now he is outside there, and wants to come in to me."
In the meantime it knocked a second time, and cried,  "Princess,youngest princess,  open the door for me,  do you not know what yousaid to me yesterday by the cool waters of the well.  Princess,youngest princess,  open the door for me."
Then said the king, "That which you have promised must you perform.Go and let him in."  She went and opened the door, and the frog hoppedin and followed her, step by step, to her chair. There he sat andcried, "Lift me up beside you."  She delayed, until at last the kingcommanded her to do it.  Once the frog was on the chair he wanted tobe on the table, and when he was on the table he said, "Now, push yourlittle golden plate nearer to me that we may eat together."  She didthis, but it was easy to see that she did not do it willingly.  Thefrog enjoyed what he ate, but almost every mouthful she took chokedher.  At length he said, "I have eaten and am satisfied, now I amtired, carry me into your little room and make your little silken bedready, and we will both lie down and go to sleep."
The king's daughter began to cry, for she was afraid of the cold frogwhich she did not like to touch, and which was now to sleep in herpretty, clean little bed.  But the king grew angry and said, "He whohelped you when you were in trouble ought not afterwards to bedespised by you."  So she took hold of the frog with two fingers,carried him upstairs, and put him in a corner, but when she was inbed he crept to her and said, "I am tired, I want to sleep as well asyou, lift me up or I will tell your father."  At this she was terriblyangry, and took him up and threw him with all her might against thewall.  "Now, will you be quiet, odious frog," said she.  But when hefell down he was no frog but a king's son with kind and beautifuleyes.  He by her father's will was now her dear companion andhusband.  Then he told her how he had been bewitched by a wickedwitch, and how no one could have delivered him from the well butherself, and that to-morrow they would go together into his kingdom.
Then they went to sleep, and next morning when the sun awoke them, acarriage came driving up with eight white horses, which had whiteostrich feathers on their heads, and were harnessed with goldenchains, and behind stood the young king's servant Faithful Henry.Faithful Henry had been so unhappy when his master was changed into afrog, that he had caused three iron bands to be laid round his heart,lest it should burst with grief and sadness.  The carriage was toconduct the young king into his kingdom.  Faithful Henry helped themboth in, and placed himself behind again, and was full of joy becauseof this deliverance.  And when they had driven a part of the way theking's son heard a cracking behind him as if something had broken.So he turned round and cried, "Henry, the carriage is breaking.""No, master, it is not the carriage.  It is a band from my heart,which was put there in my great pain when you were a frog andimprisoned in the well."  Again and once again while they were ontheir way something cracked, and each time the king's son thought thecarriage was breaking, but it was only the bands which were springingfrom the heart of Faithful Henry because his master was set free andwas happy.Hard by a great forest dwelt a wood-cutter with his wife, who had anonly child, a little girl three years old.  They were so poor,however, that they no longer had daily bread, and did not know how toget food for her.  One morning the wood-cutter went out sorrowfullyto his work in the forest, and while he was cutting wood, suddenlythere stood before him a tall and beautiful woman with a crown ofshining stars on her head, who said to him 'I am the virgin mary,mother of the child jesus. You are poor and needy, bring your childto me, I will take her with me and be her mother, and care for her.'The wood-cutter obeyed, brought his child, and gave her to the virginmary, who took her up to heaven with her.  There the child faredwell, ate sugar-cakes, and drank sweet milk, and her clothes were ofgold, and the little angels played with her.  And when she wasfourteen years of age, the virgin mary called her one day and said'dear child, I am about to make a long journey, so take into yourkeeping the keys of the thirteen doors of heaven.  Twelve of theseyou may open, and behold the glory which is within them, but thethirteenth, to which this little key belongs, is forbidden you.  Takecare not to open it, or you will be unhappy.' The girl promised to beobedient, and when the virgin mary was gone, she began to examine thedwellings of the kingdom of heaven.  Each day she opened one of them,until she had made the round of the twelve. In each of them sat oneof the apostles in the midst of a great light, and she rejoiced inall the magnificence and splendor, and the little angels who alwaysaccompanied her rejoiced with her. Then the forbidden door aloneremained, and she felt a great desire to know what could be hiddenbehind it, and said to the angels 'I will not open it entirely, and Iwill not go inside, but I will unlock it so that we can see just alittle through the opening.' 'Oh'no,  said the little angels,  'thatwould be a sin.  The virgin mary has forbidden it, and it mighteasily cause your unhappiness.' Then she was silent, but the desirein her heart was not stilled, but gnawed there and tormented her, andlet her have no rest.  And once when the angels had all gone out, shethought 'now I am quite alone, and I could peep in.  If I do, no onewill ever know.' She sought out the key, and when she had got it inher hand, she put it in the lock, and when she had put it in, sheturned it round as well.  Then the door sprang open, and she sawthere the trinity sitting in fire and splendor.  She stayed thereawhile, and looked at everything in amazement, then she touched thelight a little with her finger, and her finger became quite golden.Immediately a great fear fell on her.  She shut the door violently,and ran hi there.  But her terror would not quit her, let her do what she'Yes,  said the girl, for the second time. Then she perceived thefinger which had become golden from touching the fire of heaven, andsaw well that the child had sinned, and said for the third time 'haveyou not done it.' 'No,  said the girl for the third time.  Then saidthe virgin mary 'you have not obeyed me, and besides that you havelied, you are no longer worthy to be in heaven.' Then the girl fellinto a deep sleep, and when she awoke she lay on the earth below, andin the midst of a wilderness.  She wanted to cry out, but she couldbring forth no sound.  She sprang up and wanted to run away, butwhithersoever she turned herself, she was continually held back bythick hedges of thorns through which she could not break.  In thedesert, in which she was imprisoned, there stood an old hollow tree,and this had to be her dwelling-place.  Into this she crept whennight came, and here she slept.  Here, too, she found a shelter frommight, and her heart beat continually and would not be still, the gold toostayed on her finger, and  would not go away, let  her rub it and wash  itnever so much. It was not long  before the virgin mary came back from  herjourney.  She called the girl  before her, and asked  to have the keys  ofheaven back.  When the maiden gave  her the bunch, the virgin looked  intoher eyes and said 'have you not opened the thirteenth door also.' 'No, shereplied.  Then she laid her hand on the girl's heart, and felt how it beatand beat, and  saw right well  that she  had disobeyed her  order and  hadopened the door.  Then she said once again 'are you certain that you  havenot done it.'storm and rain, but it was a miserable life, and bitterly did sheweep when she remembered how happy she had been in heaven, and howthe angels had played with her.  Roots and wild berries were her onlyfood, and for these she sought as far as she could go.  In the autumnshe picked up the fallen nuts and leaves, and carried them into thehole.  The nuts were her food in winter, and when snow and ice came,she crept amongst the leaves like a poor little animal that she mightnot freeze.  Before long her clothes were all torn, and one bit ofthem after another fell off her.  As soon, however, as the sun shonewarm again, she went out and sat in front of the tree, and her longhair covered her on all sides like a mantle.  Thus she sat year afteryear, and felt the pain and the misery of the world. One day, whenthe trees were once more clothed in fresh green, the king of thecountry was hunting in the forest, and followed a roe, and as it hadfled into the thicket which shut in this part of the forest, he gotoff his horse, tore the bushes asunder, and cut himself a path withhis sword.  When he had at last forced his way through, he saw awonderfully beautiful maiden sitting under the tree, and she satthere and was entirely covered with her golden hair down to her veryfeet. He stood still and looked at her full of surprise, then hespoke to her and said 'who are you.  Why are you sitting here in thewilderness.' But she gave no answer, for she could not open hermouth.  The king continued 'will you go with me to my castle.  Thenshe just nodded her head a little.  The king took her in his arms,carried her to his horse, and rode home with her, and when he reachedthe royal castle he caused her to be dressed in beautiful garments,and gave her all things in abundance.  Although she could not speak,she was still so beautiful and charming that he began to love herwith all his heart, and it was not long before he married her. Aftera year or so had passed, the queen brought a son into the world.Thereupon the virgin mary appeared to her in the night when she layin her bed alone, and said 'if you will tell the truth and confessthat you did unlock the forbidden door, I will open your mouth andgive you back your speech, but if you persevere in your sin, and denyobstinately, I will take your new-born child away with me.' The thequeen was permitted to answer, but she remained hard, and said 'no, Idid not open the forbidden door, and the virgin mary took thenew-born child from her arms, and vanished with it.  Next morningwhen the child was not to be found, it was whispered among the peoplethat the queen was a man-eater, and had put her own child to death.She heard all this and could say nothing to the contrary, but theking would not believe it, for he loved her so much. When a year hadgone by the queen again bore a son, and in the night the virgin maryagain came to her, and said 'if you will confess that you opened theforbidden door, I will give you your child back and untie your tonguebut if you continue in sin and deny it, I will take away with me thisnew child also.' Then the queen again said 'no, I did not open theforbidden door.' And the virgin took the child out of her arms, andaway with her to heaven.  Next morning, when this child also haddisappeared, the people declared quite loudly that the queen haddevoured it, and the king's councillors demanded that she should bebrought to justice.  The king however, loved her so dearly that hewould not believe it, and commanded the councillors under pain ofdeath not to say any more about it. The following year the queen gavebirth to a beautiful little daughter, and for the third time thevirgin mary appeared to her in the night and said 'follow me.' Shetook the queen by the hand and led her to heaven, and showed herthere her two eldest children, who smiled at her, and were playingwith the ball of the world.  When the queen rejoiced thereat, thevirgin mary said 'is your heart not yet softened.  If you will ownthat you opened the forbidden door, I will give you back your twolittle sons.' But for the third time the queen answered 'no, I didnot open the forbidden door.' Then the virgin let her sink down toearth once more, and took from her likewise her third child.
Next morning, when the loss was reported abroad, all the people criedloudly 'the queen is a man-eater.  She must be judged, and the kingwas no longer able to restrain his councillors. Thereupon a trial washeld, and as she could not answer, and defend herself, she wascondemned to be burnt at the stake. The wood was got together, andwhen she was fast bound to the stake, and the fire began to burnround about her, the hard ice of pride melted, her heart was moved byrepentance, and she thought 'if I could but confess before my deaththat I opened the door.' Then her voice came back to her, and shecried out loudly 'yes, mary, I did it, and straight-way rain fellfrom the sky and extinguished the flames of fire, and a light brokeforth above her, and the virgin mary descended with the two littlesons by her side, and the new-born daughter in her arms.  She spokekindly to her, and said 'he who repents his sin and acknowledges it,is forgiven.' Then she gave her the three children, untied hertongue, and granted her happiness for her whole life.
A certain father had two sons, the elder of whom was smart andsensible, and could do everything, but the younger was stupid andcould neither learn nor understand anything, and when people saw himthey said 'there's a fellow who will give his father some trouble.'When anything had to be done, it was always the elder who was forcedto do it, but if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late,or in the night-time, and the way led through the churchyard, or anyother dismal place, he answered 'oh, no, father, I'll not go there,it makes me shudder.' For he was afraid.  Or when stories were toldby the fire at night which made the flesh creep, the listenerssometimes said 'oh, it makes us shudder.' The younger sat in a cornerand listened with the rest of them, and could not imagine what theycould mean.  'They are always saying 'it makes me shudder, it makesme shudder,  it does not make me shudder.' Thought he.  'That, too,must be an art of which I understand nothing.'
Now it came to pass that his father said to him one day 'hearken tome, you fellow in the corner there, you are growing tall and strong,and you too must learn something by which you can earn your bread.Look how your brother works, but you do not even earn your salt.''Well, father, he replied,  'I am quite willing to learn something -indeed, if it could but be managed, I should like to learn how toshudder.  I don't understand that at all yet.' The elder brothersmiled when he heard that, and thought to himself 'good God, what ablockhead that brother of mine is.  He will never be good foranything as long as he lives.  He who wants to be a sickle must bendhimself betimes.' The father sighed, and answered him 'you shall soonlearn what it is to shudder, but you will not earn your bread bythat.' Soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit, andthe father bewailed his trouble, and told him how his younger son wasso backward in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing.'Just think,  said he,  'when I asked him how he was going to earnhis bread, he actually wanted to learn to shudder.' 'If that be all,replied the sexton,  'he can learn that with me.  Send him to me, andI will soon polish him.' The father was glad to do it, for he thought'it will train the boy a little.' The sexton therefore took him intohis house, and he had to ring the church bell.  After a day or two,the sexton awoke him at midnight, and bade him arise and go up intothe church tower and ring the bell. 'You shall soon learn whatshuddering is,  thought he, and secretly went there before him, andwhen the boy was at the top of the tower and turned round, and wasjust going to take hold of the bell rope, he saw a white figurestanding on the stairs opposite the sounding hole.  'Who is there.'Cried he, but the figure made no reply, and did not move or stir.'Give an answer,  cried the boy,  'or take yourself off, you have nobusiness here at night.'
The sexton, however, remained standing motionless that the boy mightthink he was a ghost.  The boy cried a second time 'what do you wanthere. - Speak if you are an honest fellow, or I will throw you downthe steps.' The sexton thought 'he can't mean to be as bad as hiswords,  uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone.  Thenthe boy called to him for the third time, and as that was also to nopurpose, he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs, sothat it fell down ten steps and remained lying there in a corner.Thereupon he rang the bell, went home, and without saying a word wentto bed, and fell asleep.  The sexton's wife waited a long time forher husband, but he did not come back.  At length she became uneasy,and wakened the boy, and asked 'do you not know where my husband is.He climbed up the tower before you did.' 'No, I don't know, repliedthe boy,  'but someone was standing by the sounding hole on the otherside of the steps, and as he would neither give an answer nor goaway, I took him for a scoundrel, and threw him downstairs.  Just gothere and you will see if it was he.  I should be sorry if it were.'The woman ran away and found her husband, who was lying moaning inthe corner, and had broken his leg.
She carried him down, and then with loud screams she hastened to theboy's father.  'Your boy,  cried she,  'has been the cause of a greatmisfortune.  He has thrown my husband down the steps so that he brokehis leg.  Take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house.' Thefather was terrified, and ran thither and scolded the boy.  'Whatwicked tricks are these.' Said he,  'the devil must have put theminto your head.' 'Father,  he replied, 'do listen to me.  I am quiteinnocent.  He was standing there by night like one intent on doingevil.  I did not know who it was, and I entreated him three timeseither to speak or to go away.' 'Ah,  said the father,  'I havenothing but unhappiness with you.  Go out of my sight.  I will seeyou no more.'
'Yes, father, right willingly, wait only until it is day.  Then willI go forth and learn how to shudder, and then I shall, at any rate,understand one art which will support me.' 'Learn what you will,spoke the father,  'it is all the same to me. Here are fifty talersfor you.  Take these and go into the wide world, and tell no one fromwhence you come, and who is your father, for I have reason to beashamed of you.' 'Yes, father, it shall be as you will.  If youdesire nothing more than that, I can easily keep it in mind.'
When day dawned, therefore, the boy put his fifty talers into hispocket, and went forth on the great highway, and continually said tohimself 'if I could but shudder.  If I could but shudder.' Then a manapproached who heard this conversation which the youth was holdingwith himself, and when they had walked a little farther to where theycould see the gallows, the man said to him 'look, there is the treewhere seven men have married the ropemaker's daughter, and are nowlearning how to fly.  Sit down beneath it, and wait till night comes,and you will soon learn how to shudder.' 'If that is all that iswanted, answered the youth,  'it is easily done, but if I learn howto shudder as fast as that, you shall have my fifty talers.  Justcome back to me early in the morning.' Then the youth went to thegallows, sat down beneath it, and waited till evening came. And as hewas cold, he lighted himself a fire, but at midnight the wind blew sosharply that in spite of his fire, he could not get warm.  And as thewind knocked the hanged men against each other, and they movedbackwards and forwards, he thought to himself 'if you shiver below bythe fire, how those up above must freeze and suffer.' And as he feltpity for them, he raised the ladder, and climbed up, unbound one ofthem after the other, and brought down all seven.  Then he stoked thefire, blew it, and set them all round it to warm themselves.  Butthey sat there and did not stir, and the fire caught their clothes.So he said 'take care, or I will hang you up again.' The dead men,however, did not hear, but were quite silent, and let their rags goon burning.  At this he grew angry, and said 'if you will not takecare, I cannot help you, I will not be burnt with you,  and he hungthem up again each in his turn. Then he sat down by his fire and fellasleep, and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to havethe fifty talers, and said 'well, do you know how to shudder.' 'No,answered he,  'how should I know.  Those fellows up there did notopen their mouths, and were so stupid that they let the few old ragswhich they had on their bodies get burnt.' Then the man saw that hewould not get the fifty talers that day, and went away saying 'such ayouth has never come my way before.' The youth likewise went his way,and once more began to mutter to himself 'ah, if I could but shudder.Ah, if I could but shudder.' A waggoner who was striding behind himheard this and asked 'who are you.' 'I don't know, answered theyouth.  Then the waggoner asked 'from whence do you come.' 'I knownot.' 'Who is your father.' 'That I may not tell you.' 'What is itthat you are always muttering between your teeth.' 'Ah, replied theyouth,  'I do so wish I could shudder, but no one can teach me how.''Enough of your foolish chatter,  said the waggoner.  'Come, go withme, I will see about a place for you.' The youth went with thewaggoner, and in the evening they arrived at an inn where they wishedto pass the night.  Then at the entrance of the parlor the youthagain said quite loudly 'if I could but shudder.  If I could butshudder.' The host who heard this, laughed and said 'if that is yourdesire, there ought to be a good opportunity for you here.' 'Ah, besilent,  said the hostess,  'so many prying persons have already losttheir lives, it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes asthese should never see the daylight again.' But the youth said'however difficult it may be, I will learn it.  For this purposeindeed have I journeyed forth.' He let the host have no rest, untilthe latter told him, that not far from thence stood a haunted castlewhere any one could very easily learn what shuddering was, if hewould but watch in it for three nights.  The king had promised thathe who would venture should have his daughter to wife, and she wasthe most beautiful maiden the sun shone on.  Likewise in the castlelay great treasures, which were guarded by evil spirits, and thesetreasures would then be freed, and would make a poor man rich enough.Already many men had gone into the castle, but as yet none had comeout again.  Then the youth went next morning to the king and said 'ifit be allowed, I will willingly watch three nights in the hauntedcastle.' The king looked at him, and as the youth pleased him, hesaid 'you may ask for three things to take into the castle with you,but they must be things without life.' Then he answered 'then I askfor a fire, a turning lathe, and a cutting-board with the knife.' Theking had these things carried into the castle for him during the day.When night was drawing near, the youth went up and made himself abright fire in one of the rooms, placed the cutting-board and knifebeside it, and seated himself by the turning-lathe.  'Ah, if I couldbut shudder.' Said he,  'but I shall not learn it here either.'Towards midnight he was about to poke his fire, and as he was blowingit, something cried suddenly from one corner 'au, miau.  How cold weare.' 'You fools.' Cried he,  'what are you crying about.  If you arecold, come and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves.' And whenhe had said that, two great black cats came with one tremendous leapand sat down on each side of him, and looked savagely at him withtheir fiery eyes.  After a short time, when they had warmedthemselves, they said 'comrade, shall we have a game of cards.' 'Whynot.' He replied,  'but just show me your paws.' Then they stretchedout their claws.  'Oh, said he,  'what long nails you have.  Wait, Imust first cut them for you.' Thereupon he seized them by thethroats, put them on the cutting-board and screwed their feet fast.'I have looked at your fingers,  said he,  'and my fancy forcard-playing has gone, and he struck them dead and threw them outinto the water.  But when he had made away with these two, and wasabout to sit down again by his fire, out from every hole and cornercame black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains, and more and moreof them came until he could no longer move, and they yelled horribly,and got on his fire, pulled it to pieces, and tried to put it out.He watched them for a while quietly, but at last when they were goingtoo far, he seized his cutting-knife, and cried 'away with you,vermin, and began to cut them down. Some of them ran away, the othershe killed, and threw out into the fish-pond.  When he came back hefanned the embers of his fire again and warmed himself.  And as hethus sat, his eyes would keep open no longer, and he felt a desire tosleep.  Then he looked round and saw a great bed in the corner.'That is the very thing for me,  said he, and got into it.  When hewas just going to shut his eyes, however, the bed began to move ofits own accord, and went over the whole of the castle. 'That's right,said he,  'but go faster.' Then the bed rolled on as if six horseswere harnessed to it, up and down, over thresholds and stairs, butsuddenly hop, hop, it turned over upside down, and lay on him like amountain.  But he threw quilts and pillows up in the air, got out andsaid 'now any one who likes, may drive, and lay down by his fire, andslept till it was day.  In the morning the king came, and when he sawhim lying there on the ground, he thought the evil spirits had killedhim and he was dead.  Then said he 'after all it is a pity, -- for sohandsome a man.' The youth heard it, got up, and said 'it has notcome to that yet.' Then the king was astonished, but very glad, andasked how he had fared.  'Very well indeed, answered he,  'one nightis past, the two others will pass likewise.' Then he went to theinnkeeper, who opened his eyes very wide, and said 'I never expectedto see you alive again.  Have you learnt how to shudder yet.' 'No,said he,  'it is all in vain.  If some one would but tell me.' Thesecond night he again went up into the old castle, sat down by thefire, and once more began his old song 'if I could but shudder.' Whenmidnight came, an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard, atfirst it was low, but it grew louder and louder.  Then it was quietfor a while, and at length with a loud scream, half a man came downthe chimney and fell before him.  'Hullo.' Cried he,  'another halfbelongs to this.  This is not enough.' Then the uproar began again,there was a roaring and howling, and the other half fell downlikewise.  'Wait, said he,  'I will just stoke up the fire a littlefor you.' When he had done that and looked round again, the twopieces were joined together, and a hideous man was sitting in hisplace. 'That is no part of our bargain,  said the youth,  'the benchis mine.' The man wanted to push him away, the youth, however, wouldnot allow that, but thrust him off with all his strength, and seatedhimself again in his own place.  Then still more men fell down, oneafter the other, they brought nine dead men's legs and two skulls,and set them up and played at nine-pins with them. The youth alsowanted to play and said 'listen you, can I join you.' 'Yes, if youhave any money.' Money enough, replied he,  'but your balls are notquite round.' Then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe andturned them till they were round.  'There, now they will rollbetter.' Said he. 'Hurrah.  Now we'll have fun.' He played with themand lost some of his money, but when it struck twelve, everythingvanished from his sight.  He lay down and quietly fell asleep.  Nextmorning the king came to inquire after him.  'How has it fared withyou this time.' Asked he.  'I have been playing at nine-pins,  heanswered,  'and have lost a couple of farthings.' 'Have you notshuddered then.' 'What.' Said he,  'I have had a wonderful time.  IfI did but know what it was to shudder.' The third night he sat downagain on his bench and said quite sadly 'if I could but shudder.'When it grew late, six tall men came in and brought a coffin.  Thensaid he 'ha, ha, that is certainly my little cousin, who died only afew days ago, and he beckoned with his finger, and cried 'come,little cousin, come.' They placed the coffin on the ground, but hewent to it and took the lid off, and a dead man lay therein. He felthis face, but it was cold as ice.  'Wait, said he,  'I will warm youa little, and went to the fire and warmed his hand and laid it on thedead man's face, but he remained cold.  Then he took him out, and satdown by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his arms thatthe blood might circulate again.  As this also did no good, hethought to himself 'when two people lie in bed together, they warmeach other, and carried him to the bed, covered him over and lay downby him.  After a short time the dead man became warm too, and beganto move. Then said the youth,  'see, little cousin, have I not warmedyou.' The dead man, however, got up and cried 'now will I strangleyou.' 'What.' Said he,  'is that the way you thank me.  You shall atonce go into your coffin again,  and he took him up, threw him intoit, and shut the lid.  Then came the six men and carried him awayagain.  'I cannot manage to shudder, said he.  'I shall never learnit here as long as I live.' Then a man entered who was taller thanall others, and looked terrible.  He was old, however, and had a longwhite beard. 'You wretch,  cried he,  'you shall soon learn what itis to shudder, for you shall die.' 'Not so fast, replied the youth.'If I am to die, I shall have to have a say in it.' 'I will soonseize you, said the fiend.  'Softly, softly, do not talk so big.  Iam as strong as you are, and perhaps even stronger.' 'We shall see,said the old man.  'If you are stronger, I will let you go - come, wewill try.' Then he led him by dark passages to a smith's forge, tookan axe, and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground.  'I can dobetter than that, said the youth, and went to the other anvil.  Theold man placed himself near and wanted to look on, and his whitebeard hung down.  Then the youth seized the axe, split the anvil withone blow, and in it caught the old man's beard.  'Now I have you,said the youth.  'Now it is your turn to die.' Then he seized an ironbar and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop,when he would give him great riches. The youth drew out the axe andlet him go.  The old man led him back into the castle, and in acellar showed him three chests full of gold. 'Of these, said he,'one part is for the poor, the other for the king, the third yours.'In the meantime it struck twelve, and the spirit disappeared, so thatthe youth stood in darkness.  'I shall still be able to find my wayout, said he and felt about, found the way into the room, and sleptthere by his fire.  Next morning the king came and said 'now you musthave learnt what shuddering is.' 'No, he answered 'what can it be.My dead cousin was here, and a bearded man came and showed me a greatdeal of money down below, but no one told me what it was to shudder.''Then, said the king,  'you have saved the castle, and shall marry mydaughter.' 'That is all very well, said he,  'but still I do not knowwhat it is to shudder.' Then the gold was brought up and the weddingcelebrated, but howsoever much the young king loved his wife, andhowever happy he was, he still said always 'if I could but shudder -if I could but shudder.' And this at last angered her.  Herwaiting-maid said 'I will find a cure for him, he shall soon learnwhat it is to shudder.  She went out to the stream which flowedthrough the garden, and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons brought toher.
At night when the young king was sleeping, his wife was to draw theclothes off him and empty the bucketful of cold water with thegudgeons in it over him, so that the little fishes would sprawl abouthim.  Then he woke up and cried 'oh, what makes me shudder so. - Whatmakes me shudder so, dear wife.  Ah. Now I know what it is toshudder.'
There was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids, andloved them with all the love of a mother for her children. One dayshe wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food. So she calledall seven to her and said, dear children, I have to go into theforest, be on your guard against the wolf, if he comes in, he willdevour you all - skin, hair, and everything.  The wretch oftendisguises himself, but you will know him at once by his rough voiceand his black feet.  The kids said, dear mother, we will take goodcare of ourselves, you may go away without any anxiety.  Then the oldone bleated, and went on her way with an easy mind.
It was not long before some one knocked at the house-door and called,open the door, dear children, your mother is here, and has broughtsomething back with her for each of you.  But the little kids knewthat it was the wolf, by the rough voice.  We will not open the door,cried they, you are not our mother.  She has a soft, pleasant voice,but your voice is rough, you are the wolf.  Then the wolf went awayto a shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk, ate thisand made his voice soft with it. The he came back, knocked at thedoor of the house, and called, open the door, dear children, yourmother is here and has brought something back with her for each ofyou.  But the wolf had laid his black paws against the window, andthe children saw them and cried, we will not open the door, ourmother has not black feet like you, you are the wolf.  Then the wolfran to a baker and said, I have hurt my feet, rub some dough overthem for me.  And when the baker had rubbed his feet over, he ran tothe miller and said, strew some white meal over my feet for me.  Themiller thought to himself, the wolf wants to deceive someone, andrefused, but the wolf said, if you will not do it, I will devour you.Then the miller was afraid, and made his paws white for him. Truly,this the way of mankind.
So now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door, knockedat it and said, open the door for me, children, your dear littlemother has come home, and has brought every one of you something backfrom the forest with her.  The little kids cried, first show us yourpaws that we may know if you are our dear little mother.  Then he puthis paws in through the window, and when the kids saw that they werewhite, they believed that all he said was true, and opened the door.But who should come in but the wolf they were terrified and wanted tohide themselves.  One sprang under the table, the second into thebed, the third into the stove, the fourth into the kitchen, the fifthinto the cupboard, the sixth under the washing-bowl, and the seventhinto the clock-case.  But the wolf found them all, and used no greatceremony, one after the other he swallowed them down his throat.  Theyoungest, who was in the clock-case, was the only one he did notfind. When the wolf had satisfied his appetite he took himself off,laid himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside, and beganto sleep.  Soon afterwards the old goat came home again from theforest.  Ah.  What a sight she saw there.  The house-door stood wideopen.  The table, chairs, and benches were thrown down, thewashing-bowl lay broken to pieces, and the quilts and pillows werepulled off the bed.  She sought her children, but they were nowhereto be found.  She called them one after another by name, but no oneanswered.  At last, when she caame to the youngest, a soft voicecried, dear mother, I am in the clock-case.  She took the kid out,and it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others.Then you may imagine how she wept over her poor children.
At length in her grief she went out, and the youngest kid ran withher.  When they came to the meadow, there lay the wolf by the treeand snored so loud that the branches shook.  She looked at him onevery side and saw that something was moving and struggling in hisgorged belly.  Ah, heavens, she said, is it possible that my poorchildren whom he has swallowed down for his supper, can be stillalive.  Then the kid had to run home and fetch scissors, and a needleand thread and the goat cut open the monster's stomach, and hardlyhad she make one cut, than one little kid thrust its head out, andwhen she cut farther, all six sprang out one after another, and wereall still alive, and had suffered no injury whatever, for in hisgreediness the monster had swallowed them down whole.  What rejoicingthere was.  They embraced their dear mother, and jumped like a sailorat his wedding.  The mother, however, said, now go and look for somebig stones, and we will fill the wicked beast's stomach with themwhile he is still asleep.  Then the seven kids dragged the stonesthither with all speed, and put as many of them into his stomach asthey could get in, and the mother sewed him up again in the greatesthaste, so that he was not aware of anything and never once stirred.
When the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep, he got on hislegs, and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty, hewanted to go to a well to drink.  But when he began to walk and moveabout, the stones in his stomach knocked against each other andrattled.  Then cried he,  what rumbles and tumbles against my poorbones.  I thought 'twas six kids,  but it feels like big stones. Andwhen he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink, theheavy stones made him fall in, and he had to drown miserably.  Whenthe seven kids saw that, they came running to the spot and criedaloud, the wolf is dead.  The wolf is dead, and danced for joy roundabout the well with their mother.There was once upon a time an old king who was ill and thought tohimself 'I am lying on what must be my deathbed.' Then said he 'tellfaithful John to come to me.' Faithful John was his favorite servant,and was so called, because he had for his whole life long been sotrue to him.  When therefore he came beside the bed, the king said tohim 'most faithful John, I feel my end approaching, and have noanxiety except about my son.  He is still of tender age, and cannotalways know how to guide himself.  If you do not promise me to teachhim everything that he ought to know, and to be his foster-father, Icannot close my eyes in peace.' Then answered faithful John 'I willnot forsake him, and will serve him with fidelity, even if it shouldcost me my life.' At this, the old king said 'now I die in comfortand peace.' Then he added 'after my death, you shall show him thewhole castle - all the chambers, halls, and vaults, and all thetreasures which lie therein, but the last chamber in the longgallery, in which is the picture of the princess of the goldendwelling, shall you not show.  If he sees that picture, he will fallviolently in love with her, and will drop down in a swoon, and gothrough great danger for her sake, therefore you must protect himfrom that.' And when faithful John had once more given his promise tothe old king about this, the king said no more, but laid his head onhis pillow, and died.
When the old king had been carried to his grave, faithful John toldthe young king all that he had promised his father on his deathbed,and said 'this will I assuredly keep, and will be faithful to you asI have been faithful to him, even if it should cost me my life.' Whenthe mourning was over, faithful John said to him 'it is now time thatyou should see your inheritance.  I will show you your father'spalace.' Then he took him about everywhere, up and down, and let himsee all the riches, and the magnificent apartments, only there wasone room which he did not open, that in which hung the dangerouspicture.  The picture, however, was so placed that when the door wasopened you looked straight on it, and it was so admirably paintedthat it seemed to breathe and live, and there was nothing morecharming or more beautiful in the whole world.  The young kingnoticed, however, that faithful John always walked past this onedoor, and said 'why do you never open this one for me.' 'There issomething within it, he replied,  'which would terrify you.' But theking answered 'I have seen all the palace, and I want to know what isin this room also, and he went and tried to break open the door byforce.  Then faithful John held him back and said 'I promised yourfather before his death that you should not see that which is in thischamber, it might bring the greatest misfortune on you and on me.''Ah, no, replied the young king,  'if I do not go in, it will be mycertain destruction.  I should have no rest day or night until I hadseen it with my own eyes.  I shall not leave the place now until youhave unlocked the door.'
Then faithful John saw that there was no help for it now, and with aheavy heart and many sighs, sought out the key from the great bunch.When he opened the door, he went in first, and thought by standingbefore him he could hide the portrait so that the king should not seeit in front of him.  But what good was this.  The king stood ontip-toe and saw it over his shoulder.  And when he saw the portraitof the maiden, which was so magnificent and shone with gold andprecious stones, he fell fainting to the ground.  Faithful John tookhim up, carried him to his bed, and sorrowfully thought 'themisfortune has befallen us, Lord God, what will be the end of it.'Then he strengthened him with wine, until he came to himself again.The first words the king said were 'ah, the beautiful portrait.Whose it it.' 'That is the princess of the golden dwelling, answeredfaithful John.  Then the king continued 'my love for her is so great,that if all the leaves on all the trees were tongues, they could notdeclare it.  I will give my life to win her.  You are my mostfaithful John, you must help me.
The faithful servant considered within himself for a long time how toset about the matter, for it was difficult even to obtain a sight ofthe king's daughter.  At length he thought of a way, and said to theking 'everything which she has about her is of gold - tables, chairs,dishes, glasses, bowls, and household furniture.  Among yourtreasures are five tons of gold, let one of the goldsmiths of thekingdom fashion these into all manner of vessels and utensils, intoall kinds of birds, wild beasts and strange animals, such as mayplease her, and we will go there with them and try our luck.'
The king ordered all the goldsmiths to be brought to him, and theyhad to work night and day until at last the most splendid things wereprepared.  When everything was stowed on board a ship, faithful Johnput on the dress of a merchant, and the king was forced to do thesame in order to make himself quite unrecognizable.  Then they sailedacross the sea, and sailed on until they came to the town whereindwelt the princess of the golden dwelling.
Faithful John bade the king stay behind on the ship, and wait forhim.  'Perhaps I shall bring the princess with me,  said he,'therefore see that everything is in order, have the golden vesselsset out and the whole ship decorated.' Then he gathered together inhis apron all kinds of golden things, went on shore and walkedstraight to the royal palace. When he entered the courtyard of thepalace, a beautiful girl was standing there by the well with twogolden buckets in her hand, drawing water with them.  And when shewas just turning round to carry away the sparkling water she saw thestranger, and asked who he was.  So he answered 'I am a merchant, andopened his apron, and let her look in.  Then she cried 'oh, whatbeautiful golden things.' And put her pails down and looked at thegolden wares one after the other.  Then said the girl 'the princessmust see these, she has such great pleasure in golden things, thatshe will buy all you have.' She took him by the hand and led himupstairs, for she was the waiting-maid. When the king's daughter sawthe wares, she was quite delighted and said 'they are so beautifullyworked, that I will buy them all from you.' But faithful John said 'Iam only the servant of a rich merchant.  The things I have here arenot to be compared with those my master has in his ship.  They arethe most beautiful and valuable things that have ever been made ingold.' When she wanted to have everything brought up to her, he said'there are so many of them that it would take a great many days to dothat, and so many rooms would be required to exhibit them, that yourhouse is not big enough.' Then her curiosity and longing were stillmore excited, until at last she said 'conduct me to the ship, I willgo there myself, and behold the treasures of your master.' At thisfaithful John was quite delighted, and led her to the ship, and whenthe king saw her, he perceived that her beauty was even greater thanthe picture had represented it to be, and thought no other than thathis heart would burst in twain.  Then she boarded the ship, and theking led her within.  Faithful John, however, remained with thehelmsman, and ordered the ship to be pushed off, saying 'set allsail, till it fly like a bird in the air.' Within, the king showedher the golden vessels, every one of them, also the wild beasts andstrange animals.  Many hours went by whilst she was seeingeverything, and in her delight she did not observe that the ship wassailing away.  After she had looked at the last, she thanked themerchant and wanted to go home, but when she came to the side of theship, she saw that it was on the high seas far from land, andhurrying onwards with all sail set.  'Ah,  cried she in her alarm, 'Iam betrayed.  I am carried away and have fallen into the power of amerchant - I would rather die.' The king, however, seized her hand,and said 'I am not a merchant.  I am a king, and of no meaner originthan you are, and if I have carried you away with subtlety, that hascome to pass because of my exceeding great love for you.  The firsttime that I looked on your portrait, I fell fainting to the ground.'When the princess of the golden dwelling heard this, she wascomforted, and her heart was drawn to him, so that she willinglyconsented to be his wife. It so happened, while they were sailingonwards over the deep sea, that faithful John, who was sitting on thefore part of the vessel, making music, saw three ravens in the air,which came flying towards them.  At this he stopped playing andlistened to what they were saying to each other, for that he wellunderstood.  One cried 'oh, there he is carrying home the princess ofthe golden dwelling.' 'Yes, replied the second,  'but he has not gother yet.' Said the third 'but he has got her, she is sitting besidehim in the ship.' Then the first began again, and cried 'what goodwill that do him.  When they reach land a chestnut horse will leapforward to meet him, and the prince will want to mount it, but if hedoes that, it will run away with him, and rise up into the air, andhe will never see his maiden more.' Spoke the second 'but is there noescape.' 'Oh, yes, if someone else mounts it swiftly, and takes outthe pistol which he will find in its holster, and shoots the horsedead, the young king is saved.  But who knows that. And whosoeverdoes know it, and tells it to him, will be turned to stone from thetoe to the knee.' Then said the second 'I know more than that, evenif the horse be killed, the young king will still not keep his bride.When they go into the castle together, a wrought bridal garment willbe lying there in a dish, and looking as if it were woven of gold andsilver,  it is, however, nothing but sulphur and pitch, and if he putit on, it will burn him to the very bone and marrow.' Said the third'is there no escape at all.' 'Oh, yes, replied the second,  'if anyone with gloves on seizes the garment and throws it into the fire andburns it, the young king will be saved.  But what good will that do.Whosoever knows it and tells it to him, half his body will becomestone from the knee to the heart.' Then said the third 'I know stillmore, even if the bridal garment be burnt, the young king will stillnot have his bride. After the wedding, when the dancing begins andthe young queen is dancing, she will suddenly turn pale and fall downas if dead, and if some one does not lift her up and draw three dropsof blood from her right breast and spit them out again, she will die.But if any one who knows that were to declare it, he would becomestone from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot.' When theravens had spoken of this together, they flew onwards, and faithfulJohn had well understood everything, but from that time forth hebecame quiet and sad, for if he concealed what he had heard from hismaster, the latter would be unfortunate, and if he disclosed it tohim, he himself must sacrifice his life.  At length, however, he saidto himself 'I will save my master, even if it bring destruction onmyself.' When therefore they came to shore, all happened as had beenforetold by the ravens, and a magnificent chestnut horse sprangforward.  'Good, said the king,  'he shall carry me to my palace,and was about to mount it when faithful John got before him, jumpedquickly on it, drew the pistol out of the holster, and shot thehorse.  Then the other attendants of the king, who were not very fondof faithful John, cried 'how shameful to kill the beautiful animal,that was to have carried the king to his palace.' But the king said'hold your peace and leave him alone, he is my most faithful John.Who knows what good may come of this.' They went into the palace, andin the hall there stood a dish, and therein lay the bridal garmentlooking no otherwise than as if it were made of gold and silver.  Theyoung king went towards it and was about to take hold of it, butfaithful John pushed him away, seized it with gloves on, carried itquickly to the fire and burnt it.  The other attendants again beganto murmur, and said 'behold, now he is even burning the king's bridalgarment.' But the young king said 'who knows what good he may havedone, leave him alone, he is my most faithful John.' And now thewedding was solemnized - the dance began, and the bride also tookpart in it, then faithful John was watchful and looked into her face,and suddenly she turned pale and fell to the ground as if she weredead.  On this he ran hastily to her, lifted her up and bore her intoa chamber - then he laid her down, and knelt and sucked the threedrops of blood from her right breast, and spat them out.  Immediatelyshe breathed again and recovered herself, but the young king had seenthis, and being ignorant why faithful John had done it, was angry andcried 'throw him into a dungeon.' Next morning faithful John wascondemned, and led to the gallows, and when he stood on high, and wasabout to be executed, he said 'every one who has to die is permittedbefore his end to make one last speech, may I too claim the right.''Yes, answered the king,  'it shall be granted unto you.' Then saidfaithful John 'I am unjustly condemned, and have always been true toyou,  and he related how he had hearkened to the conversation of theravens when on the sea, and how he had been obliged to do all thesethings in order to save his master.  Then cried the king 'oh, my mostfaithful John.  Pardon, pardon - bring him down.' But as faithfulJohn spoke the last word he had fallen down lifeless and become astone.
Thereupon the king and the queen suffered great anguish, and the kingsaid 'ah, how ill I have requited great fidelity.' And ordered thestone figure to be taken up and placed in his bedroom beside his bed.And as often as he looked on it he wept and said 'ah, if I couldbring you to life again, my most faithful John.'
Some time passed and the queen bore twins, two sons who grew fast andwere her delight.  Once when the queen was at church and the fatherwas sitting with his two children playing beside him, he looked atthe stone figure again, sighed, and full of grief he said 'ah, if Icould but bring you to life again, my most faithful John.' Then thestone began to speak and said 'you can bring me to life again if youwill use for that purpose what is dearest to you.' Then cried theking 'I will give everything I have in the world for you.' The stonecontinued 'if you will cut off the heads of your two children withyour own hand, and sprinkle me with their blood, I shall be restoredto life.'
The king was terrified when he heard that he himself must kill hisdearest children, but he thought of faithful John's great fidelity,and how he had died for him, drew his sword, and with his own handcut off the children's heads.  And when he had smeared the stone withtheir blood, life returned to it, and faithful John stood once moresafe and healthy before him. He said to the king 'your truth shallnot go unrewarded, and took the heads of the children, put them onagain, and rubbed the wounds with their blood, at which they becamewhole again immediately, and jumped about, and went on playing as ifnothing had happened.  Then the king was full of joy, and when he sawthe queen coming he hid faithful John and the two children in a greatcupboard.  When she entered, he said to her 'have you been praying inthe church.' 'Yes, answered she, 'but I have constantly been thinkingof faithful John and what misfortune has befallen him through us.'Then said he 'dear wife, we can give him his life again, but it willcost us our two little sons, whom we must sacrifice.' The queenturned pale, and her heart was full of terror, but she said 'we oweit to him, for his great fidelity.' Then the king was rejoiced thatshe thought as he had thought, and went and opened the cupboard, andbrought forth faithful John and the children, and said 'God bepraised, he is delivered, and we have our little sons again also,and told her how everything had occurred.  Then they dwelt togetherin much happiness until their death.There was once a peasant who had driven his cow to the fair, and soldher for seven talers.  On the way home he had to pass a pond, andalready from afar he heard the frogs crying, aik, aik, aik, aik.Well, said he to himself, they are talking without rhyme or reason,it is seven that I have received, not eight. When he got to thewater, he cried to them, stupid animals that you are.  Don't you knowbetter than that.  It is seven thalers and not eight.  The frogs,however, stuck to their, aik aik, aik, aik.  Come, then, if you won'tbelieve it, I can count it out to you.  And he took his money out ofhis pocket and counted out the seven talers, always reckoning fourand twenty groschen to a taler.  The frogs, however, paid noattention to his reckoning, but still cried, aik, aik, aik, aik.What, cried the peasant, quite angry, if you know better than I,count it yourselves, and threw all the money at them into the water.He stood still and wanted to wait until they were through and hadreturned to him what was his, but the frogs maintained their opinionand cried continually, aik, aik, aik, aik.  And besides that, did notthrow the money out again.  He still waited a long while untilevening came on and he was forced to go home. Then he abused thefrogs and cried, you water-splashers, you thick-heads, yougoggle-eyes, you have great mouths and can screech till you hurtone's ears, but you cannot count seven talers.  Do you think I'mgoing to stand here till you get through.  And with that he wentaway, but the frogs still cried, aik, aik, aik, aik, after him tillhe went home sorely vexed. After a while he bought another cow, whichhe slaughtered, and he made the calculation that if he sold the meatwell he might gain as much as the two cows were worth, and have thehide into the bargain.  When therefore he got to the town with themeat, a great pack of dogs were gathered together in front of thegate, with a large greyhound at the head of them, which jumped at themeat, sniffed at it, and barked, wow, wow, wow.  As there was nostopping him, the peasant said to him, yes, yes, I know quite wellthat you are saying wow, wow, wow, because you want some of the meat,but I should be in a fine state if I were to give it to you.  Thedog, however, answered nothing but wow, wow.  Will you promise not todevour it all then, and will you go bail for your companions.  Wow,wow, wow, said the dog.  Well, if you insist on it, I will leave itfor you, I know you well, and know whom you serve, but this I tellyou, I must have my money in three days or else it will go ill withyou, you can just bring it out to me.  Thereupon he unloaded the meatand turned back again.  The dogs fell upon it and loudly barked, wow,wow. The countryman, who heard them from afar, said to himself, hark,now they all want some, but the big one is responsible to me for it.When three days had passed, the countryman thought, to-night my moneywill be in my pocket, and was quite delighted.  But no one would comeand pay it.  There is no trusting any one now, said he. At last helost patience, and went into the town to the butcher and demanded hismoney.  The butcher thought it was a joke, but the peasant said,jesting apart, I will have my money.  Did not the big dog bring youthe whole of the slaughtered cow three days ago.  Then the butchergrew angry, snatched a broomstick and drove him out.  Wait, said thepeasant, there is still some justice in the world, and went to theroyal palace and begged for an audience.  He was led before the king,who sat there with his daughter, and asked him what injury he hadsuffered.  Alas, said he, the frogs and the dogs have taken from mewhat is mine, and the butcher has paid me for it with the stick.  Andhe related at full length what had happened.  Thereupon the king'sdaughter began to laugh heartily, and the king said to him, I cannotgive you justice in this, but you shall have my daughter to wife forit - in her whole life she has never yet laughed as she has just doneat you, and I have promised her to him who could make her laugh.  Youmay thank God for your good fortune. Oh, answered the peasant, I donot want her at all.  I have a wife already, and she is one too manyfor me, when I go home, it is just as if I had a wife standing inevery corner.  Then the king grew angry, and said, you are a boor.Ah, lord king, replied the peasant, what can you expect from an ox,but beef.  Stop, answered the king, you shall have another reward.Be off now, but come back in three days, and then you shall have fivehundred counted out in full. When the peasant went out by the gate,the sentry said, you have made the king's daughter laugh, so you willcertainly receive something good.  Yes, that is what I think,answered the peasant, five hundred are to be counted out to me.Listen, said the soldier, give me some of it.  What can you do withall that money.  As it is you, said the peasant, you shall have twohundred,  present yourself in three days, time before the king, andlet it be paid to you.  A Jew, who was standing by and had heard theconversation, ran after the peasant, held him by the coat, and said,oh, wonder of God, what a child of fortune you are. I will change itfor you, I will change it for you into small coins, what do you wantwith the great talers.  Jew, said the countryman, three hundred canyou still have, give it to me at once in coin, in three days fromthis, you will be paid for it by the king.  The Jew was delightedwith the small profit, and brought the sum in bad groschen, three ofwhich were worth two good ones. After three days had passed,according to the king's command, the peasant went before the king.Pull his coat off, said the latter, and he shall have his fivehundred.  Ah, said the peasant, they no longer belong to me, Ipresented two hundred of them to the sentry, and three hundred theJew has changed for me, so by right nothing at all belongs to me.  Inthe meantime the soldier and the Jew entered and claimed what theyhad gained from the peasant, and they received the blows strictlycounted out.  The soldier bore it patiently and knew already how ittasted, but the Jew said sorrowfully, alas, alas, are these the heavytalers.  The king could not help laughing at the peasant, and whenall his anger was spent, he said, as you have already lost yourreward before it fell to your lot, I will give you compensation.  Gointo my treasure chamber and get some money for yourself, as much asyou will.  The peasant did not need to be told twice, and stuffedinto his big pockets whatsoever would go in.  Afterwards he went toan inn and counted out his money. The Jew had crept after him andheard how he muttered to himself, that rogue of a king has cheated meafter all, why could he not have given me the money himself, and thenI should have known what I had.  How can I tell now if what I havehad the luck to put in my pockets is right or not.  Good heavens,said the Jew to himself, that man is speaking disrespectfully of ourlord the king, I will run and inform, and then I shall get a reward,and he will be punished as well. When the king heard of the peasant'swords he fell into a passion, and commanded the Jew to go and bringthe offender to him.  The Jew ran to the peasant, you are to go atonce to the lord king in the very clothes you have on.  I know what'sright better than that, answered the peasant, I shall have a new coatmade first. Do you think that a man with so much money in his pocketshould go there in his ragged old coat.  The Jew, as he saw that thepeasant would not stir without another coat, and as he feared that ifthe king's anger cooled, he himself would lose his reward, and thepeasant his punishment, said, I will out of pure friendship lend youa coat for the short time.  What people will not do for love.  Thepeasant was contented with this, put the Jew's coat on, and went offwith him. The king reproached the countryman because of the evilspeaking of which the Jew had informed him.  Ah, said the peasant,what a Jew says is always false - no true word ever comes out of hismouth.  That rascal there is capable of maintaining that I have hiscoat on. What is that, shrieked the Jew, is the coat not mine.  HaveI not lent it to you out of pure friendship, in order that you mightappear before the lord king.  When the king heard that, he said, theJew has assuredly deceived one or the other of us, either myself orthe peasant.  And again he ordered something to be counted out to himin hard thalers.  The peasant, however, went home in the good coat,with the good money in his pocket, and said to himself, this time Ihave made it.There were once upon a time a king and a queen who livedhappily together and had twelve children, but they wereall boys.  Then said the king to his wife, if the thirteenthchild which you are about to bring into the world, is a girl, thetwelve boys shall die, in order that her possessions may be great,and that the kingdom may fall to her alone.  He even caused twelvecoffins to be made, which were already filled with shavings, andin each lay a little death pillow, and he had them taken into alocked-up room, and then he gave the queen the key of it, and badeher not to speak of this to anyone.
The mother, however, now sat and lamented all day long, untilthe youngest son, who was always with her, and whom she hadnamed benjamin, from the bible, said to her, dear mother, whyare you so sad.
Dearest child, she answered, I may not tell you.  But he lether have no rest until she went and unlocked the room, and showedhim the twelve coffins ready filled with shavings.  Then she said,my dearest benjamin, your father has had these coffins made foryou and for your eleven brothers, for if I bring a little girl intothe world, you are all to be killed and buried in them.  And as shewept while she was saying this, the son comforted her and said, weepnot, dear mother, we will save ourselves, and go hence.  But shesaid, go forth into the forest with your eleven brothers, and letone sit constantly on the highest tree which can be found, and keepwatch, looking towards the tower here in the castle.  If I givebirth to a little son, I will put up a white flag, and then you mayventure to come back.  But if I bear a daughter, I will hoist a redflag, and then fly hence as quickly as you are able, and may thegood God protect you.  And every night I will rise up and pray foryou - in winter that you may be able to warm yourself at a fire, andin summer that you may not faint away in the heat.
After she had blessed her sons therefore, they went forth intothe forest.  They each kept watch in turn, and sat on the highestoak and looked towards the tower.  When eleven days had passedand the turn came to benjamin, he saw that a flag was being raised.It was, however, not the white, but the blood-red flag whichannounced that they were all to die.  When the brothers heard that,they were very angry and said, are we all to suffer death for thesake of a girl.  We swear that we will avenge ourselves -wheresoever we find a girl, her red blood shall flow.
Thereupon they went deeper into the forest, and in the midstof it, where it was the darkest, they found a little bewitched hut,which was standing empty.  Then said they, here we will dwell,and you benjamin, who are the youngest and weakest, you shallstay at home and keep house, we others will go out and fetch food.
Then they went into the forest and shot hares, wild deer, birds andpigeons, and whatsoever there was to eat.  This they took tobenjamin, who had to dress it for them in order that they mightappease their hunger.  They lived together ten years in the littlehut, and the time did not appear long to them.
The little daughter which their mother the queen had givenbirth to, was now grown up.  She was good of heart, and fair offace, and had a golden star on her forehead.  Once, on a greatwashing, she saw twelve men's shirts among the things, and asked hermother, to whom do these twelve shirts belong, for they are fartoo small for father.  Then the queen answered with a heavyheart, dear child, these belong to your twelve brothers.  Said themaiden, where are my twelve brothers, I have never yet heardof them.  She replied, God knows where they are, they arewandering about the world.  Then she took the maiden and openedthe chamber for her, and showed her the twelve coffins with theshavings, and the death pillows.  These coffins, said she,were destined for your brothers, who went away secretly before youwere born, and she related to her how everything had happened.Then said the maiden, dear mother, weep not, I will go and seekmy brothers.
So she took the twelve shirts and went forth, and straight intothe great forest.  She walked the whole day, and in the evening shecame to the bewitched hut.  Then she entered it and found a youngboy, who asked, from whence do you come, and whither are youbound, and was astonished that she was so beautiful, and woreroyal garments, and had a star on her forehead.  And she answered,I am a king's daughter, and am seeking my twelve brothers, andI will walk as far as the sky is blue until I find them.  And sheshowed him the twelve shirts which belonged to them.  Thenbenjamin saw that she was his sister, and said, I am benjamin, youryoungest brother.  And she began to weep for joy, and benjaminwept also, and they kissed and embraced each other with thegreatest love.  But after this he said, dear sister, there is stillone difficulty.  We have agreed that every maiden whom we meetshall die, because we have been obliged to leave our kingdom onaccount of a girl.  Then said she, I will willingly die, if by sodoing I can save my twelve brothers.
No, answered he, you shall not die.  Seat yourself beneath thistub until our eleven brothers come, and then I will soon come toan agreement with them.
She did so, and when it was night the others came from hunting,and their dinner was ready.  And as they were sitting at table, andeating, they asked, what news is there.  Said benjamin, don'tyou know anything.  No, they answered.  He continued, you havebeen in the forest and I have stayed at home, and yet I knowmore than you do.  Tell us then, they cried.  He answered, butpromise me that the first maiden who meets us shall not be killed.
Yes, they all cried, she shall have mercy, only do tell us.Then said he, our sister is here, and he lifted up the tub, andthe king's daughter came forth in her royal garments with thegolden star on her forehead, and she was beautiful, delicate andfair.  Then they were all rejoiced, and fell on her neck, and kissedand loved her with all their hearts.
Now she stayed at home with benjamin and helped him withthe work.  The eleven went into the forest and caught game, anddeer, and birds, and wood-pigeons that they might have food, andthe little sister and benjamin took care to make it ready for them.She sought for the wood for cooking and herbs for vegetables, andput the pans on the fire so that the dinner was always ready whenthe eleven came.  She likewise kept order in the little house, andput beautifully white clean coverings on the little beds and thebrothers were always contented and lived in great harmony with her.
Once upon a time the two at home had prepared a wonderfulfeast, and when they were all together, they sat down and ate anddrank and were full of gladness.  There was, however, a littlegarden belonging to the bewitched house wherein stood twelve lilyflowers, which are likewise called student-lilies.  She wished togive her brothers pleasure, and plucked the twelve flowers, andthought she would present each brother with one while at dinner.But at the self-same moment that she plucked the flowers the twelvebrothers were changed into twelve ravens, and flew away over theforest, and the house and garden vanished likewise.  And now thepoor maiden was alone in the wild forest, and when she lookedaround, an old woman was standing near her who said, my child,what have you done.  Why did you not leave the twelve whiteflowers growing.  They were your brothers, who are now forevermorechanged into ravens.  The maiden said, weeping, is there no way ofsaving them.
No, said the woman, there is but one in the whole world, andthat is so hard that you will not save them by it, for you must bedumb for seven years, and may not speak or laugh, and if you speakone single word, and only an hour of the seven years is wanting, allis in vain, and your brothers will be killed by the one word.
Then said the maiden in her heart, I know with certainty thatI shall set my brothers free, and went and sought a high tree andseated herself in it and spun, and neither spoke nor laughed.  Nowit so happened that a king was hunting in the forest, who had agreat greyhound which ran to the tree on which the maiden wassitting, and sprang about it, whining, and barking at her.  Thenthe king came by and saw the beautiful king's daughter with thegolden star on her brow, and was so charmed with her beauty thathe called to ask her if she would be his wife.  She made no answer,but nodded a little with her head.  So he climbed up the treehimself, carried her down, placed her on his horse, and bore herhome.  Then the wedding was solemnized with great magnificence andrejoicing, but the bride neither spoke nor smiled.  When they hadlived happily together for a few years, the king's mother, who wasa wicked woman, began to slander the young queen, and said tothe king, this is a common beggar girl whom you have broughtback with you.  Who knows what wicked tricks she practises secretly.Even if she be dumb, and not able to speak, she still mightlaugh for once.  But those who do not laugh have bad consciences.
At first the king would not believe it, but the old woman urged thisso long, and accused her of so many evil things, that at last theking let himself be persuaded and sentenced her to death.And now a great fire was lighted in the courtyard in which shewas to be burnt, and the king stood above at the window andlooked on with tearful eyes, because he still loved her so much.And when she was bound fast to the stake, and the fire was lickingat her clothes with its red tongue, the last instant of the sevenyears expired.  Then a whirring sound was heard in the air, andtwelve ravens came flying towards the place, and sank downwards, andwhen they touched the earth they were her twelve brothers, whomshe had saved.  They tore the fire asunder, extinguished the flames,set their dear sister free, and kissed and embraced her.  And nowas she dared to open her mouth and speak, she told the king why shehad been dumb, and had never laughed.  The king rejoiced whenhe heard that she was innocent, and they all lived in great unityuntil their death.  The wicked step-mother was taken before thejudge, and put into a barrel filled with boiling oil and venomoussnakes, and died an evil death.Little brother took his little sister by the hand and said, sinceour mother died we have had no happiness.  Our step-motherbeats us every day, and if we come near her she kicks us awaywith her foot.  Our meals are the hard crusts of bread that are leftover.  And the little dog under the table is better off, for sheoften throws it a choice morsel.  God pity us, if our mother onlyknew.  Come, we will go forth together into the wide world.
They walked the whole day over meadows, fields, and stonyplaces.  And when it rained the little sister said, heaven and ourhearts are weeping together.  In the evening they came to a largeforest, and they were so weary with sorrow and hunger and thelong walk, that they lay down in a hollow tree and fell asleep.The next day when they awoke, the sun was already high in thesky, and shone down hot into the tree.  Then the brother said,sister, I am thirsty.  If I knew of a little brook I would go andjust take a drink.  I think I hear one running.  The brother got upand took the little sister by the hand, and they set off to findthe brook.  But the wicked step-mother was a witch, and had seen howthe two children had gone away, and had crept after them secretly,as witches creep, and had bewitched all the brooks in the forest.
Now when they found a little brook leaping brightly over thestones, the brother was going to drink out of it, but the sisterheard how it said as it ran, who drinks of me will be a tiger.Who drinks of me will be a tiger.  Then the sister cried, pray,dear brother, do not drink, or you will become a wild beast, andtear me to pieces.  The brother did not drink, although he was sothirsty, but said, I will wait for the next spring.
When they came to the next brook the sister heard this also say,who drinks of me will be a wolf.  Who drinks of me will be a wolf.Then the sister cried out, pray, dear brother, do not drink,or you will become a wolf, and devour me.  The brother did notdrink, and said, I will wait until we come to the next spring, butthen I must drink, say what you like.  For my thirst is too great.And when they came to the third brook the sister heard how itsaid as it ran, who drinks of me will be a roebuck.  Who drinksof me will be a roebuck.  The sister said, oh, I pray you, dearbrother, do not drink, or you will become a roebuck, and run awayfrom me.  But the brother had knelt down at once by the brook,and had bent down and drunk some of the water, and as soon asthe first drops touched his lips he lay there in the form of ayoung roebuck.
And now the sister wept over her poor bewitched brother, andthe little roe wept also, and sat sorrowfully near to her.  But atlast the girl said, be quiet, dear little roe, I will never,never leave you.
Then she untied her golden garter and put it round the roebuck'sneck, and she plucked rushes and wove them into a soft cord.  Thisshe tied to the little animal and led it on, and she walked deeperand deeper into the forest.
And when they had gone a very long way they came at last to alittle house, and the girl looked in.  And as it was empty, shethought, we can stay here and live.  Then she sought for leavesand moss to make a soft bed for the roe.  And every morning shewent out and gathered roots and berries and nuts for herself, andbrought tender grass for the roe, who ate out of her hand, and wascontent and played round about her.  In the evening, when the sisterwas tired, and had said her prayer, she laid her head upon theroebuck's back - that was her pillow, and she slept softly on it.And if only the brother had had his human form it would have been adelightful life.For some time they were alone like this in the wilderness.  Butit happened that the king of the country held a great hunt in theforest.  Then the blasts of the horns, the barking of dogs and themerry shouts of the huntsmen rang through the trees, and the roebuckheard all, and was only too anxious to be there.  Oh, said he,to his sister, let me be off to the hunt, I cannot bear it anylonger, and he begged so much that at last she agreed.  But, saidshe to him, come back to me in the evening.  I must shut my door forfear of the rough huntsmen, so knock and say, my little sister,let me in, that I may know you.  And if you do not say that, Ishall not open the door.  Then the young roebuck sprang away.  Sohappy was he and so merry in the open air.The king and the huntsmen saw the lovely animal, and startedafter him, but they could not catch him, and when they thoughtthat they surely had him, away he sprang through the bushes andvanished.  When it was dark he ran to the cottage, knocked, andsaid, my little sister, let me in.  Then the door was opened forhim, and he jumped in, and rested himself the whole night throughupon his soft bed.The next day the hunt began again, and when the roebuck oncemore heard the bugle-horn, and the ho. Ho. Of the huntsmen, hehad no peace, but said, sister, let me out, I must be off.  Hissister opened the door for him, and said, but you must be here againin the evening and say your pass-word.When the king and his huntsmen again saw the young roebuckwith the golden collar, they all chased him, but he was too quickand nimble for them.  This lasted the whole day, but by the eveningthe huntsmen had surrounded him, and one of them wounded hima little in the foot, so that he limped and ran slowly.  Then ahunter crept after him to the cottage and heard how he said, mylittle sister, let me in, and saw that the door was opened for him,and was shut again at once.  The huntsman took notice of it all, andwent to the king and told him what he had seen and heard.  Thenthe king said, to-morrow we will hunt once more.The little sister, however, was dreadfully frightened when shesaw that her fawn was hurt.  She washed the blood off him, laidherbs on the wound, and said, go to your bed, dear roe, that youmay get well again.  But the wound was so slight that the roebuck,next morning, did not feel it any more.  And when he again heardthe sport outside, he said, I cannot bear it, I must be there.They shall not find it so easy to catch me.  The sister cried, andsaid, this time they will kill you, and here am I alone in theforest and forsaken by all the world.  I will not let you out.  Thenyou will have me die of grief, answered the roe.  When I hear thebugle-horns I feel as if I must jump out of my skin.  Then thesister could not do otherwise, but opened the door for him with aheavy heart, and the roebuck, full of health and joy, bounded intothe forest.When the king saw him, he said to his huntsmen, now chasehim all day long till night-fall, but take care that no one does himany harm.As soon as the sun had set, the king said to the huntsman, nowcome and show me the cottage in the wood.  And when he was atthe door, he knocked and called out, dear little sister, let me in.Then the door opened, and the king walked in, and there stooda maiden more lovely than any he had ever seen.  The maiden wasfrightened when she saw, not her little roe, but a man come in whowore a golden crown upon his head.  But the king looked kindlyat her, stretched out his hand, and said, will you go with me tomy palace and be my dear wife.  Yes, indeed, answered themaiden, but the little roe must go with me, I cannot leave him.The king said, it shall stay with you as long as you live, andshall want nothing.  Just then he came running in, and the sisteragain tied him with the cord of rushes, took it in her own hand, andwent away with the king from the cottage.The king took the lovely maiden upon his horse and carriedher to his palace, where the wedding was held with great pomp.She was now the queen, and they lived for a long time happilytogether.  The roebuck was tended and cherished, and ran about inthe palace-garden. But the wicked step-mother, because of whom the children hadgone out into the world, had never thought but that the sister hadbeen torn to pieces by the wild beasts in the wood, and that thebrother had been shot for a roebuck by the huntsmen.  Now whenshe heard that they were so happy, and so well off, envy andjealousy rose in her heart and left her no peace, and she thought ofnothing but how she could bring them again to misfortune.  Her owndaughter, who was ugly as night, and had only one eye, reproachedher and said, a queen.  That ought to have been my luck.  Just bequiet, answered the old woman, and comforted her by saying,when the time comes I shall be ready.As time went on the queen had a pretty little boy, and ithappened that the king was out hunting.  So the old witch took theform of the chamber maid, went into the room where the queenlay, and said to her, come the bath is ready.  It will do you good,and give you fresh strength.  Make haste before it gets cold.Her daughter also was close by.  So they carried the weaklyqueen into the bath-room, and put her into the bath.  Then theyshut the door and ran away.  But in the bath-room they had madea fire of such hellish heat that the beautiful young queen was soonsuffocated.When this was done the old woman took her daughter, put anightcap on her head, and laid her in bed in place of the queen.She gave her too the shape and look of the queen, only shecould not make good the lost eye.  But in order that the king mightnot see it, she was to lie on the side on which she had no eye.In the evening when he came home and heard that he had a sonhe was heartily glad, and was going to the bed of his dear wife tosee how she was.  But the old woman quickly called out, for yourlife leave the curtains closed.  The queen ought not to see thelight yet, and must have rest.  The king went away, and did not findout that a false queen was lying in the bed.But at midnight, when all slept, the nurse, who was sitting in thenursery by the cradle, and who was the only person awake, sawthe door open and the true queen walk in.  She took the child outof the cradle, laid it on her arm, and suckled it.  Then she shookup its pillow, laid the child down again, and covered it with thelittle quilt.  And she did not forget the roebuck, but went into thecorner where it lay, and stroked its back.  Then she went quitesilently out of the door again.  The next morning the nurse askedthe guards whether anyone had come into the palace during the night,but they answered, no, we have seen no one.She came thus many nights and never spoke a word.  The nursealways saw her, but she did not dare to tell anyone about it.When some time had passed in this manner, the queen began tospeak in the night, and said,     how fares my child, how fares my roe.     Twice shall I come, then never more.The nurse did not answer, but when the queen had gone again,went to the king and told him all.   The king said, ah, God.What is this.  To-morrow night I will watch by the child.  In theevening he went into the nursery, and at midnight the queen againappeared and said,     how fares my child, how fares my roe.     Once will I come, then never more.And she nursed the child as she was wont to do before shedisappeared.  The king dared not speak to her, but on the nextnight he watched again.  Then she said,     how fares my child, how fares my roe.     This time I come, then never more.Then the king could not restrain himself.  He sprang towards her,and said, you can be none other than my dear wife.  She answered,yes, I am your dear wife, and at the same moment she receivedlife again, and by God's grace became fresh, rosy and full ofhealth.Then she told the king the evil deed which the wicked witchand her daughter had been guilty of towards her.  The king orderedboth to be led before the judge, and the judgment was deliveredagainst them.  The daughter was taken into the forest where she wastorn to pieces by wild beasts, but the witch was cast into the fireand miserably burnt.  And as soon as she was burnt to ashes, theroebuck changed his shape, and received his human form again, so thesister and brother lived happily together all their lives.There were once a man and a woman who had long in vainwished for a child.  At length the woman hoped that Godwas about to grant her desire.  These people had a littlewindow at the back of their house from which a splendid gardencould be seen, which was full of the most beautiful flowers andherbs.  It was, however, surrounded by a high wall, and no onedared to go into it because it belonged to an enchantress, who hadgreat power and was dreaded by all the world.  One day the womanwas standing by this window and looking down into the garden,when she saw a bed which was planted with the most beautifulrampion - rapunzel, and it looked so fresh and green that shelonged for it, and had the greatest desire to eat some.  This desireincreased every day, and as she knew that she could not get anyof it, she quite pined away, and began to look pale and miserable.Then her husband was alarmed, and asked, what ails you, dearwife.  Ah, she replied, if I can't eat some of the rampion, whichis in the garden behind our house, I shall die.  The man, who lovedher, thought, sooner than let your wife die, bring her some ofthe rampion yourself, let it cost what it will.  At twilight, heclambered down over the wall into the garden of the enchantress,hastily clutched a handful of rampion, and took it to his wife.  Sheat once made herself a salad of it, and ate it greedily.  It tastedso good to her - so very good, that the next day she longed for itthree times as much as before.  If he was to have any rest, herhusband must once more descend into the garden.  In the gloom ofevening, therefore, he let himself down again.  But when he hadclambered down the wall he was terribly afraid, for he saw theenchantress standing before him.  How can you dare, said she withangry look, descend into my garden and steal my rampion like athief.  You shall suffer for it.  Ah, answered he, let mercy takethe place of justice, I only made up my mind to do it out ofnecessity.  My wife saw your rampion from the window, and felt sucha longing for it that she would have died if she had not got someto eat.  Then the enchantress allowed her anger to be softened, andsaid to him, if the case be as you say, I will allow you to takeaway with you as much rampion as you will, only I make onecondition, you must give me the child which your wife will bringinto the world.  It shall be well treated, and I will care for itlike a mother.  The man in his terror consented to everything, andwhen the woman was brought to bed, the enchantress appeared at once,gave the child the name of rapunzel, and took it away with her.Rapunzel grew into the most beautiful child under the sun.When she was twelve years old, the enchantress shut her into atower, which lay in a forest, and had neither stairs nor door, butquite at the top was a little window.  When the enchantresswanted to go in, she placed herself beneath it and cried,     rapunzel, rapunzel,     let down your hair to me.Rapunzel had magnificent long hair, fine as spun gold, and whenshe heard the voice of the enchantress she unfastened her braidedtresses, wound them round one of the hooks of the window above,and then the hair fell twenty ells down, and the enchantress climbedup by it.After a year or two, it came to pass that the king's son rodethrough the forest and passed by the tower.  Then he heard a song,which was so charming that he stood still and listened.  This wasrapunzel, who in her solitude passed her time in letting her sweetvoice resound.  The king's son wanted to climb up to her, andlooked for the door of the tower, but none was to be found.  Herode home, but the singing had so deeply touched his heart, thatevery day he went out into the forest and listened to it.  Once whenhe was thus standing behind a tree, he saw that an enchantresscame there, and he heard how she cried,     rapunzel, rapunzel,     let down your hair.Then rapunzel let down the braids of her hair, and theenchantress climbed up to her.  If that is the ladder by which onemounts, I too will try my fortune, said he, and the next day whenit began to grow dark, he went to the tower and cried,     rapunzel, rapunzel,     let down your hair.Immediately the hair fell down and the king's son climbed up.At first rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man, such asher eyes had never yet beheld, came to her.  But the king's sonbegan to talk to her quite like a friend, and told her that hisheart had been so stirred that it had let him have no rest, and hehad been forced to see her.  Then rapunzel lost her fear, and whenhe asked her if she would take him for her husband, and she saw thathe was young and handsome, she thought, he will love me more thanold dame gothel does.  And she said yes, and laid her hand in his.She said, I will willingly go away with you, but I do not knowhow to get down.  Bring with you a skein of silk every time thatyou come, and I will weave a ladder with it, and when that is readyI will descend, and you will take me on your horse.  They agreedthat until that time he should come to her every evening, for theold woman came by day.  The enchantress remarked nothing ofthis, until once rapunzel said to her, tell me, dame gothel, howit happens that you are so much heavier for me to draw up thanthe young king's son - he is with me in a moment.  Ah. Youwicked child, cried the enchantress.  What do I hear you say.  Ithought I had separated you from all the world, and yet you havedeceived me.  In her anger she clutched rapunzel's beautifultresses, wrapped them twice round her left hand, seized a pair ofscissors with the right, and snip, snap, they were cut off, and thelovely braids lay on the ground.  And she was so pitiless that shetook poor rapunzel into a desert where she had to live in greatgrief and misery.On the same day that she cast out rapunzel, however, theenchantress fastened the braids of hair, which she had cut off, tothe hook of the window, and when the king's son came and cried,     rapunzel, rapunzel,     let down your hair,she let the hair down.  The king's son ascended, but instead offinding his dearest rapunzel, he found the enchantress, who gazedat him with wicked and venomous looks.  Aha, she cried mockingly,you would fetch your dearest, but the beautiful bird sitsno longer singing in the nest.  The cat has got it, and will scratchout your eyes as well.  Rapunzel is lost to you.  You will never seeher again.  The king's son was beside himself with pain, and inhis despair he leapt down from the tower.  He escaped with his life,but the thorns into which he fell pierced his eyes.  Then hewandered quite blind about the forest, ate nothing but roots andberries, and did naught but lament and weep over the loss of hisdearest wife.  Thus he roamed about in misery for some years, and atlength came to the desert where rapunzel, with the twins to whichshe had given birth, a boy and a girl, lived in wretchedness.  Heheard a voice, and it seemed so familiar to him that he went towardsit, and when he approached, rapunzel knew him and fell on his neckand wept.  Two of her tears wetted his eyes and they grew clearagain, and he could see with them as before.  He led her to hiskingdom where he was joyfully received, and they lived for a longtime afterwards, happy and contented.There was once a man whose wife died, and a woman whose husbanddied, and the man had a daughter, and the woman also had adaughter.  The girls were acquainted with each other, and wentout walking together, and afterwards came to the woman in herhouse.  Then said she to the man's daughter, listen, tell yourfather that I would like to marry him, and then you shallwash yourself in milk every morning, and drink wine, but my owndaughter shall wash herself in water and drink water.  The girlwent home, and told her father what the woman had said.  Theman said, what shall I do.  Marriage is a joy and also a torment.At length as he could come to no decision, he pulled off his boot,and said, take this boot, it has a hole in the sole of it.  Go withit up to the loft, hang it on the big nail, and then pour water intoit.  If it hold the water, then I will again take a wife, but if itrun through, I will not.  The girl did as she was bid, but the waterdrew the hole together and the boot became full to the top.  Sheinformed her father how it had turned out.  Then he himself went up,and when he saw that she was right, he went to the widow and wooedher, and the wedding was celebrated.The next morning, when the two girls got up, there stood beforethe man's daughter milk for her to wash in and wine for her todrink, but before the woman's daughter stood water to washherself with and water for drinking.  On the second morning, stoodwater for washing and water for drinking before the man'sdaughter as well as before the woman's daughter.  And on the thirdmorning stood water for washing and water for drinking before theman's daughter, and milk for washing and wine for drinking, beforethe woman's daughter, and so it continued.  The woman became herstep-daughter's bitterest enemy, and day by day did her best totreat her still worse.  She was also envious because herstep-daughter was beautiful and lovable, and her own daughter uglyand repulsive.Once, in winter, when everything was frozen as hard as a stone,and hill and vale lay covered with snow, the woman made a frockof paper, called her step-daughter, and said, here, put on thisdress and go out into the wood, and fetch me a little basketful ofstrawberries - I have a fancy for some.  Good heavens, said thegirl, no strawberries grow in winter.  The ground is frozen, andbesides the snow has covered everything.  And why am I to go inthis paper frock.  It is so cold outside that one's very breathfreezes.  The wind will blow through the frock, and the thornstear it off my body.  Will you contradict me,  said the step-mother.See that you go, and do not show your face again until you havethe basketful of strawberries.  Then she gave her a little piece ofhard bread, and said, this will last you the day, and thought,you will die of cold and hunger outside, and will never be seenagain by me.Then the maiden was obedient, and put on the paper frock, andwent out with the basket.  Far and wide there was nothing but snow,and not a green blade to be seen.  When she got into the wood shesaw a small house out of which peeped three little men.  She wishedthem good day, and knocked modestly at the door.  They cried,come in, and she entered the room and seated herself on the bench bythe stove, where she began to warm herself and eat her breakfast.The little men said, give us some of it, too.  Willingly,she said, and divided her piece of bread in two 'and gavethem the half.  They asked, what do you here in the forest in thewinter time, in your thin dress.  Ah, she answered, I am to lookfor a basketful of strawberries, and am not to go home until I cantake them with me.  When she had eaten her bread, they gave hera broom and said, sweep away the snow at the back door.  Butwhen she was outside, the three little men said to each other, whatshall we give her as she is so good, and has shared her bread withus.  Then said the first, my gift is, that she shall every day growmore beautiful.  The second said, my gift is, that gold pieces shallfall out of her mouth every time she speaks.  The third said, mygift is, that a king shall come and take her to wife.The girl, however, did as the little men had biddenher, swept away the snow behind the little house withthe broom, and what did she find but real ripe strawberries,which came up quite dark-red out of the snow.  In herjoy she hastily gathered her basket full, thanked thelittle men, shook hands with each of them, and ranhome to take her step-mother what she had longed for so much.When she went in and said good-evening, a piece of gold at oncefell out of her mouth.  Thereupon she related what had happenedto her in the wood, but with every word she spoke, gold pieces fellfrom her mouth, until very soon the whole room was covered withthem.  Now look at her arrogance, cried the step-sister, to throwabout gold in that way.  But she was secretly envious of it, andwanted to go into the forest also to seek strawberries.  The mothersaid, no, my dear little daughter, it is too cold, you might freezeto death.  However, as her daughter let her have no peace, themother at last yielded, made her a magnificent coat of fur, whichshe was obliged to put on, and gave her bread-and-butter and cakefor her journey.The girl went into the forest and straight up to the little house.The three little men peeped out again, but she did not greet them,and without looking round at them and without speaking to them,she went awkwardly into the room, seated herself by the stove, andbegan to eat her bread-and-butter and cake.  Give us some of it,cried the little men.  But she replied, there is not enough formyself, so how can I give it away to other people.  When she hadfinished eating, they said, there is a broom for you, sweep it allclean in front of the back-door.  Sweep for yourselves, sheanswered, I am not your servant.  When she saw that they werenot going to give her anything, she went out by the door.  Then thelittle men said to each other, what shall we give her as she is sonaughty, and has a wicked envious heart, that will never let her doa good turn to any one.  The first said, I grant that she may growuglier every day.  The second said, I grant that at every word shesays, a toad shall spring out of her mouth.  The third said, I grantthat she may die a miserable death.  The maiden looked forstrawberries outside, but as she found none, she went angrily home.And when she opened her mouth, and was about to tell her mother whathad happened to her in the wood, with every word she said, a toadsprang out of her mouth, so that everyone was seized with horrorof her.Then the step-mother was still more enraged, and thought ofnothing but how to do every possible injury to the man's daughter,whose beauty, however, grew daily greater.  At length she took acauldron, set it on the fire, and boiled yarn in it.  When it wasboiled, she flung it on the poor girl's shoulder, and gave her anaxe in order that she might go on the frozen river, cut a hole inthe ice, and rinse the yarn.  She was obedient, went thither and cuta hole in the ice.  And while she was in the midst of her cutting, asplendid carriage came driving up, in which sat the king.  Thecarriage stopped, and the king asked, my child, who are you, andwhat are you doing here.  I am a poor girl, and I am rinsing yarn.Then the king felt compassion, and when he saw that she was so verybeautiful, he said to her, will you go away with me.  Ah, yes, withall my heart, she answered, for she was glad to get away from themother and sister.So she got into the carriage and drove away with the king, andwhen they arrived at his palace, the wedding was celebrated withgreat pomp, as the little men had granted to the maiden.  When ayear was over, the young queen bore a son, and as the step-motherhad heard of her great good-fortune, she came with her daughterto the palace and pretended that she wanted to pay her a visit.But, when the king had gone out, and no one else was present, thewicked woman seized the queen by the head, and her daughterseized her by the feet, and they lifted her out of the bed, andthrew her out of the window into the stream which flowed by.  Thenthe ugly daughter laid herself in the bed, and the old womancovered her up over her head.  When the king came home again andwanted to speak to his wife, the old woman cried, hush, hush, thatcan't be now, she is lying in a violent sweat.  You must let herrest to-day.  The king suspected no evil, and did not come backagain till next morning.  And as he talked with his wife and sheanswered him, with every word a toad leaped out, whereas formerly apiece of gold had fallen.  Then he asked what that could be, but theold woman said that she had got that from the violent sweat, andwould soon lose it again.  During the night, however, the scullionsaw a duck come swimming up the gutter, and it said -     king, what art thou doing now.     Sleepest thou, or wakest thou.And as he returned no answer, it said -     and my guests, what may they do.The scullion said -     they are sleeping soundly, too.Then it asked again -     what does little baby mine.He answered -     sleepeth in her cradle fine.Then she went upstairs in the form of the queen, nursed thebaby, shook up its little bed, covered it over, and then swam awayagain down the gutter in the shape of a duck.  She came thus fortwo nights.  On the third, she said to the scullion, go and tell theking to take his sword and swing it three times over me on thethreshold.  Then the scullion ran and told this to the king, whocame with his sword and swung it thrice over the spirit, and at thethird time, his wife stood before him strong, living, and healthyas she had been before.  Thereupon the king was full of great joy,but he kept the queen hidden in a chamber until the sunday, whenthe baby was to be christened.  And when it was christened he said,what does a person deserve who drags another out of bed andthrows him in the water.  The wretch deserves nothing better,answered the old woman, than to be taken and put in a barrelstuck full of nails, and rolled down hill into the water.  Then,said the king, you have pronounced your own sentence.  And heordered such a barrel to be brought, and the old woman to be putinto it with her daughter, and then the top was hammered on, andthe barrel rolled down hill until it went into the river.There was once a girl who was idle and would not spin, andlet her mother say what she would, she could not bring herto it.  At last the mother was once so overcome with angerand impatience, that she beat her, at which the girl beganto weep loudly.  Now at this very moment the queen drove by,and when she heard the weeping she stopped her carriage, wentinto the house and asked the mother why she was beating herdaughter so that the cries could be heard out on the road.  Thenthe woman was ashamed to reveal the laziness of her daughterand said, I cannot get her to leave off spinning.  She insistson spinning for ever and ever, and I am poor, and cannotprocure the flax.  Thenanswered the queen, there is nothing that I like better to hearthan spinning, and I am never happier than when the wheels arehumming.  Let me have your daughter with me in the palace.  Ihave flax enough, and there she shall spin as much as she likes.The mother was heartily satisfied with this, and the queentook the girl with her.  When they had arrived at the palace,she led her up into three rooms which were filled from thebottom to the top with the finest flax.  Now spin me this flax,said she, and when you have done it, you shall have my eldestson for a husband, even if you are poor.  I care not for that,your untiring industry is dowry enough.  The girl was secretlyterrified, for she could not have spun the flax, no, not ifshe had lived till she was three hundred years old, and hadsat at it every day from morning till night.  When therefore shewas alone, she began to weep, and sat thus for three dayswithout moving a finger.  On the third day came the queen, andwhen she saw that nothing had yet been spun, she was surprised,but the girl excused herself by saying that she had not been ableto begin because of her great distress at leaving her mother'shouse.  The queen was satisfied with this, but said when she wasgoing away, tomorrow you must begin to work.When the girl was alone again, she did not know what to do, andin her distress went to the window.  Then she saw three womencoming towards her, the first of whom had a broad flat foot, thesecond had such a great underlip that it hung down over her chin,and the third had a broad thumb.  They remained standing beforethe window, looked up, and asked the girl what was amiss withher.  She complained of her trouble, and then they offeredher their help and said, if you will invite us to the wedding,not be ashamed of us, and will call us your aunts, and likewisewill place us at your table, we will spin up the flax for you,and that in a very short time.  With all my heart, she replied,do but come in and begin the work at once.  Then she let in thethree strange women, and cleared a place in the first room,where they seated themselves and began their spinning.  The onedrew the thread and trod the wheel, the other wetted the thread,the third twisted it, and struck the tablewith her finger, and as often as she struck it, a skein ofthread fell to the ground that was spun in the finest mannerpossible.  The girl concealed the three spinners from the queen,and showed her whenever she came the great quantity of spunthread, until the latter could not praise her enough.  Whenthe first room was empty she went to the second, and at last tothe third, and that too was quickly cleared.  Then the three womentook leave and said to the girl, do not forget what you havepromised us - it will make your fortune.When the maiden showed the queen the empty rooms, and the greatheap of yarn, she gave orders for the wedding, and the bridegroomrejoiced that he was to have such a clever and industrious wife,and praised her mightily.  I have three aunts, said the girl,and as they have been very kind to me, I should not like toforget them in my good fortune, allow me to invite them to thewedding, and let them sit with us at table.  The queen and thebridegroom said, why should we not allow that.  Therefore whenthe feast began, the three women entered in strange apparel, andthe bride said, welcome, dear aunts.  Ah, said the bridegroom,how do you come by these odious friends.  Thereupon he went tothe one with the broad flat foot, and said, how do you come bysuch a broad foot.  By treading, she answered, by treading.  Thenthe bridegroom went to the second, and said, how do you come byyour falling lip.  By licking, she answered, by licking.  Thenhe asked the third, how do you come by your broad thumb.  Bytwisting the thread, she answered, by twisting the thread.  Onthis the king's son was alarmed and said, neither now nor evershall my beautiful bride touch a spinning-wheel.  And thus shegot rid of the hateful flax-spinning.Hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wifeand his two children.  The boy was called Hansel and thegirl Gretel.  He had little to bite and to break, and once whengreat dearth fell on the land, he could no longer procure even dailybread.  Now when he thought over this by night in his bed, andtossed about in his anxiety, he groaned and said to his wife, whatis to become of us.  How are we to feed our poor children, whenwe no longer have anything even for ourselves.  I'll tell you what,husband, answered the woman, early to-morrow morning wewill take the children out into the forest to where it is thethickest.  There we will light a fire for them, and give each ofthem one more piece of bread, and then we will go to our work andleave them alone.  They will not find the way home again, and weshall be rid of them.  No, wife, said the man, I will not do that.How can I bear to leave my children alone in the forest.   The wildanimals would soon come and tear them to pieces.  O' you fool, saidshe, then we must all four die of hunger, you may as well plane theplanks for our coffins, and she left him no peace until heconsented.  But I feel very sorry for the poor children, all thesame, said the man.
The two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger, andhad heard what their step-mother had said to their father.  Gretelwept bitter tears, and said to Hansel, now all is over with us.Be quiet, Gretel, said Hansel, do not distress yourself, I will soonfind a way to help us.  And when the old folks had fallen asleep,he got up, put on his little coat, opened the door below, and creptoutside.  The moon shone brightly, and the white pebbles which layin front of the house glittered like real silver pennies.  Hanselstooped and stuffed the little pocket of his coat with as many as hecould get in.  Then he went back and said to Gretel, be comforted,dear little sister, and sleep in peace, God will not forsake us, andhe lay down again in his bed.  When day dawned, but before thesun had risen, the woman came and awoke the two children, sayingget up, you sluggards.  We are going into the forest to fetchwood.  She gave each a little piece of bread, and said, there issomething for your dinner, but do not eat it up before then, for youwill get nothing else.  Gretel took the bread under her apron, asHansel had the pebbles in his pocket.  Then they all set outtogether on the way to the forest.  When they had walked a shorttime, Hansel stood still and peeped back at the house, and did soagain and again.  His father said, Hansel, what are you looking atthere and staying behind for.  Pay attention, and do not forget howto use your legs.  Ah, father, said Hansel, I am looking at mylittle white cat, which is sitting  up on the roof, and wants to saygood-bye to me.  The wife said, fool, that is not your little cat,that is the morning sun which is shining on the chimneys.  Hansel,however, had not been looking back at the cat, but had beenconstantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones out of his pocketon the road.
When they had reached the middle of the forest, the father said,now, children, pile up some wood, and I will light a fire that youmay not be cold.  Hansel and Gretel gathered brushwood together,as high as a little hill.  The brushwood was lighted, and when theflames were burning very high, the woman said, now, children,lay yourselves down by the fire and rest, we will go into the forestand cut some wood.  When we have done, we will come back andfetch you away.
Hansel and Gretel sat by the fire, and when noon came, each atea little piece of bread, and as they heard the strokes of thewood-axe they believed that their father was near.  It was not theaxe, however, but a branch which he had fastened to a withered treewhich the wind was blowing backwards and forwards.  And as they hadbeen sitting such a long time, their eyes closed with fatigue, andthey fell fast asleep.  When at last they awoke, it was already darknight.  Gretel began to cry and said, how are we to get out of theforest now.  But Hansel comforted her and said, just wait a little,until the moon has risen, and then we will soon find the way.  Andwhen the full moon had risen, Hansel took his little sister by thehand, and followed the pebbles which shone like newly-coined silverpieces, and showed them the way.
They walked the whole night long, and by break of day cameonce more to their father's house.  They knocked at the door, andwhen the woman opened it and saw that it was Hansel and Gretel,she said, you naughty children, why have you slept so long in theforest.  We thought you were never coming back at all.  The father,however, rejoiced, for it had cut him to the heart to leave thembehind alone.
Not long afterwards, there was once more great dearth throughoutthe land, and the children heard their mother saying at night totheir father, everything is eaten again, we have one half loaf left,and that is the end.  The children must go, we will take themfarther into the wood, so that they will not find their way outagain.  There is no other means of saving ourselves.  The man'sheart was heavy, and he thought, it would be better for you to sharethe last mouthful with your children.  The woman, however, wouldlisten to nothing that he had to say, but scolded and reproachedhim.  He who says a must say b, likewise, and as he had yielded thefirst time, he had to do so a second time also.
The children, however, were still awake and had heard theconversation.  When the old folks were asleep, Hansel again got up,and wanted to go out and pick up pebbles as he had done before, butthe woman had locked the door, and Hansel could not get out.Nevertheless he comforted his little sister, and said, do not cry,Gretel, go to sleep quietly, the good God will help us.Early in the morning came the woman, and took the children out oftheir beds.  Their piece of bread was given to them, but it wasstill smaller than the time before.  On the way into the forestHansel crumbled his in his pocket, and often stood still and threw amorsel on the ground.  Hansel, why do you stop and look round.Said the father, go on.  I am looking back at my little pigeonwhich is sitting on the roof, and wants to say good-bye to me,answered Hansel.  Fool.  Said the woman, that is not your littlepigeon, that is the morning sun that is shining on the chimney.Hansel, however, little by little, threw all the crumbs on the path.The woman led the children still deeper into the forest, where theyhad never in their lives been before.  Then a great fire was againmade, and the mother said, just sit there, you children, and whenyou are tired you may sleep a little.  We are going into the forestto cut wood, and in the evening when we are done, we will come andfetch you away.  When it was noon, Gretel shared her piece ofbread with Hansel, who had scattered his by the way.  Then theyfell asleep and evening passed, but no one came to the poorchildren.  They did not awake until it was dark night, and Hanselcomforted his little sister and said, just wait, Gretel, until themoon rises, and then we shall see the crumbs of bread which I havestrewn about, they will show us our way home again.  When the mooncame they set out, but they found no crumbs, for the many thousandsof birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked them allup.  Hansel said to Gretel, we shall soon find the way, but they didnot find it.  They walked the whole night and all the next day toofrom morning till evening, but they did not get out of the forest,and were very hungry, for they had nothing to eat but two or threeberries, which grew on the ground.  And as they were so weary thattheir legs would carry them no longer, they lay down beneath a treeand fell asleep.
It was now three mornings since they had left their father's house.They began to walk again, but they always came deeper into theforest, and if help did not come soon, they must die of hunger andweariness.  When it was mid-day, they saw a beautiful snow-whitebird sitting on a bough, which sang so delightfully that they stoodstill and listened to it.  And when its song was over, it spread itswings and flew away before them, and they followed it until theyreached a little house, on the roof of which it alighted.  And whenthey approached the little house they saw that it was built ofbread and covered with cakes, but that the windows were of clearsugar.  We will set to work on that, said Hansel, and have a goodmeal.  I will eat a bit of the roof, and you Gretel, can eat someof the window, it will taste sweet.  Hansel reached up above, andbroke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted, and Gretelleant against the window and nibbled at the panes.  Then a softvoice cried from the parlor -     nibble, nibble, gnaw     who is nibbling at my little house.The children answered -     the wind, the wind,     the heaven-born wind,and went on eating without disturbing themselves.  Hansel, wholiked the taste of the roof, tore down a great piece of it, andGretel pushed out the whole of one round window-pane, sat down, andenjoyed herself with it.  Suddenly the door opened, and a womanas old as the hills, who supported herself on crutches, camecreeping out.  Hansel and Gretel were so terribly frightened thatthey let fall what they had in their hands. The old woman, however,nodded her head, and said, oh, you dear children, who has broughtyou here.  Do come in, and stay with me.  No harm shall happen toyou.  She took them both by the hand, and led them into her littlehouse.  Then good food was set before them, milk and pancakes,with sugar, apples, and nuts.  Afterwards two pretty little bedswere covered with clean white linen, and Hansel and Gretel lay downin them, and thought they were in heaven.
The old woman had only pretended to be so kind.  She was in realitya wicked witch, who lay in wait for children, and had only built thelittle house of bread in order to entice them there.  When a childfell into her power, she killed it, cooked and ate it, and thatwas a feast day with her.  Witches have red eyes, and cannot seefar, but they have a keen scent like the beasts, and are aware whenhuman beings draw near.  When Hansel and Gretel came into herneighborhood, she laughed with malice, and said mockingly, I havethem, they shall not escape me again.  Early in the morning beforethe children were awake, she was already up, and when she saw bothof them sleeping and looking so pretty, with their plump and rosycheeks, she muttered to herself, that will be a dainty mouthful.
Then she seized Hansel with her shrivelled hand, carriedhim into a little stable, and locked him in behind a grated door.Scream as he might, it would not help him.  Then she went toGretel, shook her till she awoke, and cried, get up, lazy thing,fetch some water, and cook something good for your brother, he isin the stable outside, and is to be made fat.  When he is fat, Iwill eat him.  Gretel began to weep bitterly, but it was all invain, for she was forced to do what the wicked witch commanded.And now the best food was cooked for poor Hansel, but Gretelgot nothing but crab-shells.  Every morning the woman crept to thelittle stable, and cried, Hansel, stretch out your finger that I mayfeel if you will soon be fat.  Hansel, however, stretched out alittle bone to her, and the old woman, who had dim eyes, could notsee it, and thought it was Hansel's finger, and was astonished thatthere was no way of fattening him.  When four weeks had gone by,and Hansel still remained thin, she was seized with impatience andwould not wait any longer.  Now, then, Gretel, she cried to thegirl, stir yourself, and bring some water.  Let Hansel be fat orlean, to-morrow I will kill him, and cook him.  Ah, how the poorlittle sister did lament when she had to fetch the water, and howher tears did flow down her cheeks.  Dear God, do help us, shecried.  If the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us, weshould at any rate have died together.  Just keep your noise toyourself, said the old woman, it won't help you at all.
Early in the morning, Gretel had to go out and hang up thecauldron with the water, and light the fire.  We will bake first,said the old woman, I have already heated the oven, and kneadedthe dough.  She pushed poor Gretel out to the oven, from whichflames of fire were already darting.  Creep in, said the witch,and see if it properly heated, so that we can put the bread in.And once Gretel was inside, she intended to shut the oven and lether bake in it, and then she would eat her, too.  But Gretel sawwhat she had in mind, and said, I do not know how I am to do it.How do I get in.  Silly goose, said the old woman, the door is bigenough.  Just look, I can get in myself, and she crept up andthrust her head into the oven.  Then Gretel gave her a push thatdrove her far into it, and shut the iron door, and fastened thebolt.  Oh.  Then she began to howl quite horribly, but Gretel ranaway, and the godless witch was miserably burnt to death.Gretel, however, ran like lightning to Hansel, opened his littlestable, and cried, Hansel, we are saved.  The old witch is dead.Then Hansel sprang like a bird from its cage when the door isopened.  How they did rejoice and embrace each other, and danceabout and kiss each other.  And as they had no longer any need tofear her, they went into the witch's house, and in every cornerthere stood chests full of pearls and jewels.  These are far betterthan pebbles. Said Hansel, and thrust into his pockets whatevercould be got in, and Gretel said, I, too, will take something homewith me, and filled her pinafore full.  But now we must be off, saidHansel, that we may get out of the witch's forest.
When they had walked for two hours, they came to a greatstretch of water.  We cannot cross, said Hansel, I see nofoot-plank, and no bridge.  And there is also no ferry, answeredGretel, but a white duck is swimming there.  If I ask her, shewill help us over.  Then she cried -     little duck, little duck, dost thou see,     Hansel and Gretel are waiting for thee.     There's never a plank, or bridge in sight,     take us across on thy back so white.The duck came to them, and Hansel seated himself on its back,and told his sister to sit by him.  No, replied Gretel, that will betoo heavy for the little duck.  She shall take us across, one afterthe other.  The good little duck did so, and when they were oncesafely across and had walked for a short time, the forest seemed tobe more and more familiar to them, and at length they saw fromafar their father's house.  Then they began to run, rushed into theparlor, and threw themselves round their father's neck.  The manhad not known one happy hour since he had left the children in theforest.  The woman, however, was dead.  Gretel emptied herpinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the room, andHansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to add tothem.  Then all anxiety was at an end, and they lived together inperfect happiness.  My tale is done, there runs a mouse, whosoevercatches it, may make himself a big fur cap out of it.There was once on a time a poor man, who could no longersupport his only son.  Then said the son, dear father, things go sobadly with us that I am a burden to you.  I wouldrather go away and see how I can earn my bread.  So the father gavehim his blessing, and with great sorrow took leave of him.  At thistime the king of a mighty empire was at war and the youth tookservice with him, and went out to fight.  And when he came beforethe enemy, there was a battle, and great danger, and it rained shotuntil his comrades fell on all sides, and when the leader also waskilled, those left were about to take flight, but the youth steppedforth, spoke boldly to them, and cried, we will not let ourfather-land be ruined.  Then the others followed him, and he pressedon and conquered the enemy.  When the king heard that he owed thevictory to him alone, he raised him above all the others, gave himgreat treasures, and made him the first in the kingdom.
The king had a daughter who was very beautiful, but she wasalso very strange.  She had made a vow to take no one as her lordand husband who did not promise to let himself be buried alivewith her if she died first.  If he loves me with all his heart, saidshe, of what use will life be to him afterwards.  On her side shewould do the same, and if he died first, would go down to the gravewith him.  This strange oath had up to this time frightened awayall wooers, but the youth became so charmed with her beauty thathe cared for nothing, but asked her father for her.  But do youknow what you must promise, said the king.  I must be buriedwith her, he replied, if I outlive her, but my love is so great thatI do not mind the danger.  Then the king consented, and the weddingwas solemnized with great splendor.
They lived now for a while happy and contented with each other,and then it befell that the young queen was attacked by a severeillness, and no physician could save her. And as she lay there dead,the young king remembered what he had been obliged to promise, andwas horrified at having to lie down alive in the grave, but therewas no escape.  The king had placed sentries at all the gates, andit was not possible to avoid his fate.  As the day came when thecorpse was to be buried, he was taken down with it into the royalvault and then the door was shut and bolted.
Near the coffin stood a table on which were four candles, fourloaves of bread, and four bottles of wine, and when this provisioncame to an end, he would have to die of hunger.  And now he satthere full of pain and grief, ate every day only a little piece ofbread, drank only a mouthful of wine, and nevertheless saw deathdaily drawing nearer.  Whilst he thus gazed before him, he saw asnake creep out of a corner of the vault and approach the dead body.And as he thought it came to gnaw at it, he drew his sword and said,as long as I live, you shall not touch her, and hewed the snake inthree pieces.  After a time a second snake crept out of the hole,and when it saw the other lying dead and cut in pieces, it went back,but soon came again with three green leaves in its mouth.  Then ittook the three pieces of the snake, laid them together, as theyfitted, and placed one of the leaves on each wound.  Immediately thesevered parts joined themselves together, the snake moved, andbecame alive again, and both of them hastened away together.  Theleaves were left lying on the ground, and a desire came into themind of the unhappy man who had been watching all this, to knowif the wondrous power of the leaves which had brought the snaketo life again, could not likewise be of service to a human being.
So he picked up the leaves and laid one of them on the mouth of hisdead wife, and the two others on her eyes.  And hardly had he donethis than the blood stirred in her veins, rose into her pale face,and colored it again.  Then she drew breath, opened her eyes, andsaid, ah, God, where am I.  You are with me, dear wife, he answered,and told her how everything had happened, and how hehad brought her back again to life.  Then he gave her some wine andbread, and when she had regained her strength, he raised her upand they went to the door and knocked, and called so loudly thatthe sentries heard it, and told the king.  The king came downhimself and opened the door, and there he found both strong andwell, and rejoiced with them that now all sorrow was over.  Theyoung king, however, took the three snake-leaves with him, gavethem to a servant and said, keep them for me carefully, and carrythem constantly about you.  Who knows in what trouble they may yetbe of service to us.
But a change had taken place in his wife.  After she had beenrestored to life, it seemed as if all love for her husband had goneout of her heart.  After some time, when he wanted to make a voyageover the sea, to visit his old father, and they had gone on board aship, she forgot the great love and fidelity which he had shownher, and which had been the means of rescuing her from death,and conceived a wicked inclination for the skipper.  And once whenthe young king lay there asleep, she called in the skipper andseized the sleeper by the head, and the skipper took him by thefeet, and thus they threw him down into the sea.  When theshameful deed was done, she said, now let us return home, and saythat he died on the way.  I will extol and praise you so to myfather that he will marry me to you, and make you the heir to hiscrown.  But the faithful servant who had seen all that they did,unseen by them, unfastened a little boat from the ship, got into it,sailed after his master, and let the traitors go on their way.  Hefished up the dead body, and by the help of the three snake-leaveswhich he carried about with him, and laid on the eyes and mouth,he fortunately brought the young king back to life.
They both rowed with all their strength day and night, and theirlittle boat sailed so swiftly that they reached the old kingbefore the others.  He was astonished when he saw them come alone,and asked what had happened to them.  When he learnt the wickednessof his daughter he said, I cannot believe that she has behaved soill, but the truth will soon come to light, and bade both go into asecret chamber and keep themselves hidden from everyone.  Soonafterwards the great ship came sailing in, and the godless womanappeared before her father with a troubled countenance.  He said,why do you come back alone.  Where is your husband.  Ah, dearfather, she replied, I come home again in great grief.  Duringthe voyage, my husband became suddenly ill and died, and if thegood skipper had not given me his help, it would have gone ill withme.  He was present at his death, and can tell you all.  The kingsaid, I will make the dead alive again, and opened the chamber,and bade the two come out.  When the woman saw her husband, shewas thunderstruck, and fell on her knees and begged for mercy.
The king said, there is no mercy.  He was ready to die with youand restored you to life again, but you have murdered him in hissleep, and shall receive the reward that you deserve.  Then she wasplaced with her accomplice in a ship which had been pierced withholes, and sent out to sea, where they soon sank amid the waves.A long time ago there lived a king who was famed for his wisdomthrough all the land.  Nothing was hidden from him, and it seemedas if news of the most secret things was brought to him throughthe air.  But he had a strange custom, every day after dinner,when the table was cleared, and no one else was present, a trustyservant had to bring him one more dish.  It was covered, however,and even the servant did not know what was in it, neither didanyone know, for the king never took off the cover to eat of ituntil he was quite alone.This had gone on for a long time, when one day the servant, whotook away the dish, was overcome with such curiosity that hecould not help carrying the dish into his room.  When he hadcarefully locked the door, he lifted up the cover, and saw a whitesnake lying on the dish.  But when he saw it he could not denyhimself the pleasure of tasting it, so he cut off a little bitand put it into his mouth.  No sooner had it touched his tonguethan he heard a strange whispering of little voices outside hiswindow.  He went and listened, and then noticed that it wasthe sparrows who were chattering together, and telling oneanother of all kinds of things which they had seen in the fieldsand woods.  Eating the snake had given him power of understandingthe language of animals.Now it so happened that on this very day the queen lost her mostbeautiful ring, and suspicion of having stolen it fell upon thistrusty servant, who was allowed to go everywhere.  The kingordered the man to be brought before him, and threatened withangry words that unless he could before the morrow point outthe thief, he himself should be looked upon as guilty and executed.In vain he declared his innocence, he was dismissed with no betteranswer.In his trouble and fear he went down into the courtyard and tookthought how to help himself out of his trouble.  Nowsome ducks were sitting together quietly by a brook and takingtheir rest, and, whilst they were making their feathers smoothwith their bills, they were having a confidential conversationtogether.  The servant stood by and listened.  They were tellingone another of all the places where they had been waddlingabout all the morning, and what good food they had found, and onesaid in a pitiful tone, something lies heavy on my stomach, as Iwas eating in haste I swallowed a ring which lay under thequeen's window.  The servant at once seized her by the neck,carried her to the kitchen, and said to the cook, here is a fineduck, pray, kill her.  Yes, said the cook, and weighed her inhis hand, she has spared no trouble to fatten herself, and hasbeen waiting to be roasted long enough.  So he cut off her head,and as she was being dressed for the spit, the queen's ring wasfound inside her.The servant could now easily prove his innocence, and the king,to make amends for the wrong, allowed him to ask a favor, andpromised him the best place in the court that he could wish for.The servant refused everything, and only asked for a horse andsome money for traveling, as he had a mind to see the worldand go about a little.  When his request was granted heset out on his way, and one day came to a pond, where he sawthree fishes caught in the reeds and gasping for water.  Now,though it is said that fishes are dumb, he heard them lamentingthat they must perish so miserably, and, as he had a kind heart,he got off his horse and put the three prisoners back into thewater.  They leapt with delight, put out their heads, and criedto him, we will remember you and repay you for saving us.He rode on, and after a while it seemed to him that he heard avoice in the sand at his feet.  He listened, and heard an ant-kingcomplain, why cannot folks, with their clumsy beasts, keep offour bodies.  That stupid horse, with his heavy hoofs, has beentreading down my people without mercy.  So he turned on to a sidepath and the ant-king cried out to him, we will remember you - onegood turn deserves another.The path led him into a wood, and here he saw two old ravensstanding by their nest, and throwing out their young ones.Out with you, you idle, good-for-nothing creatures, criedthey, we cannot find food for you any longer, you are big enough,and can provide for yourselves.  But the poor young ravens layupon the ground, flapping their wings, and crying, oh, whathelpless chicks we are.  We must shift for ourselves, and yet wecannot fly.  What can we do, but lie here and starve.  So thegood young fellow alighted and killed his horse with his sword,and gave it to them for food.  Then they came hopping up to it,satisfied their hunger, and cried, we will remember you - one goodturn deserves another.And now he had to use his own legs, and when he had walked along way, he came to a large city.  There was a great noise andcrowd in the streets, and a man rode up on horseback, cryingaloud, the king's daughter wants a husband, but whoever seeks herhand must perform a hard task, and if he does not succeed hewill forfeit his life.  Many had already made the attempt, butin vain, nevertheless when the youth saw the king's daughterhe was so overcome by her great beauty that he forgot alldanger, went before the king, and declared himself a suitor.So he was led out to the sea, and a gold ring was thrown intoit, before his eyes, then the king ordered him to fetch thisring up from the bottom of the sea, and added, if you come upagain without it you will be thrown in again and again until youperish amid the waves.  All the people grieved for the handsomeyouth, then they went away, leaving him alone by the sea.He stood on the shore and considered what he should do, whensuddenly he saw three fishes come swimming towards him, and theywere the very fishes whose lives he had saved.  The one in themiddle held a mussel in its mouth, which it laid on the shoreat the youth's feet, and when he had taken it up and opened it,there lay the gold ring in the shell.  Full of joy he took it tothe king, and expected that he would grant him the promised reward.But when the proud princess perceived that he was not her equalin birth, she scorned him, and required him first to performanother task.  She went down into the garden and strewed with herown hands ten sacks-full of millet-seed on the grass, then shesaid, tomorrow morning before sunrise these must be picked up,and not a single grain be wanting.The youth sat down in the garden and considered how it mightbe possible to perform this task, but he could think of nothing,and there he sat sorrowfully awaiting the break of day, when heshould be led to death.  But as soon as the first rays of thesun shone into the garden he saw all the ten sacks standing sideby side, quite full, and not a single grain was missing.  Theant-king had come in the night with thousands and thousands ofants, and the grateful creatures had by great industry pickedup all the millet-seed and gathered them into the sacks.Presently the king's daughter herself came down into the garden,and was amazed to see that the young man had done the task shehad given him.  But she could not yet conquer her proud heart,and said, although he has performed both the tasks, he shall notbe my husband until he has brought me an apple from the tree oflife.  The youth did not know where the tree of life stood, buthe set out, and would have gone on for ever, as long as his legswould carry him, though he had no hope of finding it.  After hehad wandered through three kingdoms, he came one evening to awood, and lay down under a tree to sleep.  But he heard arustling in the branches, and a golden apple fell into his hand.At the same time three ravens flew down to him, perched themselvesupon his knee, and said, we are the three young ravens whomyou saved from starving, when we had grown big, and heard thatyou were seeking the golden apple, we flew over the sea to theend of the world, where the tree of life stands, and have broughtyou the apple.  The youth, full of joy, set out homewards, andtook the golden apple to the king's beautiful daughter, who hadno more excuses left to make.  They cut the apple of life in twoand ate it together, and then her heart became full of love forhim, and they lived in undisturbed happiness to a great age.One summer's morning a little tailor was sitting on his tableby the window, he was in good spirits, and sewed with all hismight.  Then came a peasant woman down the street crying, goodjams, cheap.  Good jams, cheap.  This rang pleasantly in thetailor's ears, he stretched his delicate head out of thewindow, and called, come up here, dear woman, here you will getrid of your goods.  The woman came up the three steps to thetailor with her heavy basket, and he made her unpack all the potsfor him.  He inspected each one, lifted it up, put his nose to it,and at length said, the jam seems to me to be good, so weigh meout four ounces, dear woman, and if it is a quarter of a poundthat is of no consequence.  The woman who had hoped to find agood sale, gave him what he desired, but went away quite angryand grumbling.  Now, this jam shall be blessed by God, cried thelittle tailor, and give me health and strength.  So he broughtthe bread out of the cupboard, cut himself a piece right acrossthe loaf and spread the jam over it.  This won't taste bitter,said he, but I will just finish the jacket before I take a bite.He laid the bread near him, sewed on, and in his joy, made biggerand bigger stitches.  In the meantime the smell of the sweet jamrose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers, and theywere attracted and descended on it in hosts.  HI, who invited you,said the little tailor, and drove the unbidden guests away.  Theflies, however, who understood no german, would not be turnedaway, but came back again in ever-increasing companies.  Thelittle tailor at last lost all patience,and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table, andsaying, wait, and I will give it to you, struck it mercilesslyon them.  When he drew it away and counted, there lay before himno fewer than seven, dead and with legs stretched out.  Are you afellow of that sort, said he, and could not help admiring his ownbravery.  The whole town shall know of this.  And the little tailorhastened to cut himself a girdle, stitched it, and embroidered onit in large letters, seven at one stroke.  What, the town, hecontinued, the whole world shall hear of it.  And his heartwagged with joy like a lamb's tail.  The tailor put on the girdle,and resolved to go forth into the world, because he thought hisworkshop was too small for his valor.  Before he went away, hesought about in the house to see if there was anything which hecould take with him, however, he found nothing but an old cheese,and that he put in his pocket.  In front of the door he observed abird which had caught itself in the thicket.  It had to go into hispocket with the cheese.  Now he took to the road boldly, and as hewas light and nimble, he felt no fatigue.  The road led him up amountain, and when he had reached the highest point of it, theresat a powerful giant looking peacefully about him.  The littletailor went bravely up, spoke to him, and said, good day, comrade,so you are sitting there overlooking the wide-spread world.  I amjust on my way thither, and want to try my luck.  Have you anyinclination to go with me.  The giant looked contemptuously at thetailor, and said, you ragamuffin.  You miserable creature.Oh, indeed, answered the little tailor, and unbuttoned his coat,and showed the giant the girdle, there may you read what kind ofa man I am.  The giant read, seven at one stroke.  And thoughtthat they had been men whom the tailor had killed, and began tofeel a little respect for the tiny fellow.  Nevertheless, hewished to try him first, and took a stone in his hand andsqueezed it together so that water dropped out of it.  Do thatlikewise, said the giant, if you have strength.  Is that all, saidthe tailor, that is child's play with us, and put his hand into hispocket, brought out the soft cheese, and pressed it until theliquid ran outof it.  Faith, said he, that was a little better, wasn't it.  Thegiant did not know what to say, and could not believe it of thelittle man.  Then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so highthat the eye could scarcely follow it.  Now, little mite of a man,do that likewise.  Well thrown, said the tailor, but after all thestone came down to earth again, I will throw you one which shallnever come back at all.  And he put his hand into his pocket,took out the bird, and threw it into the air.  The bird,delighted with its liberty, rose, flew away and did not comeback.  How does that shot please you, comrade, asked the tailor.You can certainly throw, said the giant, but now we will see ifyou are able to carry anything properly.  He took the littletailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on the ground,and said, if you are strong enough, help me to carry the tree outof the forest.  Readily, answered the little man, take the trunkon your shoulders, and I will raise up the branches and twigs,after all, they are the heaviest.  The giant took the trunk onhis shoulder, but the tailor seated himself on a branch, and thegiant who could not look round, had to carry away the whole tree,and the little tailor into the bargain, he behind, was quitemerry and happy, and whistled the song, three tailors rode forthfrom the gate, as if carrying the tree were child's play.  Thegiant, after he had dragged the heavy burden part of the way,could go no further, and cried, hark you, I shall have to let thetree fall.  The tailor sprang nimbly down, seized the tree withboth arms as if he had been carrying it, and said to the giant,you are such a great fellow, and yet can not even carry the tree.They went on together, and as they passed a cherry-tree, the giantlaid hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit washanging, bent it down, gave it into the tailor's hand, and badehim eat.  But the little tailor was much too weak to hold thetree, and when the giant let it go, it sprang back again, and thetailor was tossed into the air with it.  When he had fallen downagain without injury, the giant said, what is this.  Have younot strength enough to hold the weak twig.  There is no lack ofstrength, answered the little tailor.  Do you think that could beanything to a man who hasstruck down seven at one blow.  I leapt over the tree because thehuntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket.  Jump as I did,if you can do it.  The giant made the attempt, but could not getover the tree, and remained hanging in the branches, so that inthis also the tailor kept the upper hand.The giant said, if you are such a valiant fellow, come with meinto our cavern and spend the night with us.  The little tailorwas willing, and followed him.  When they went into the cave,other giants were sitting there by the fire, and each of themhad a roasted sheep in his hand and was eating it.  The littletailor looked round and thought, it is much more spacious herethan in my workshop.  The giant showed him a bed, and said he wasto lie down in it and sleep.  The bed, however, was too big forthe little tailor, he did not lie down in it, but crept into acorner.  When it was midnight, and the giant thought that thelittle tailor was lying in a sound sleep, he got up, took a greatiron bar, cut through the bed with one blow, and thought he hadfinished off the grasshopper for good.  With the earliest dawnthe giants went into the forest, and had quite forgotten the littletailor, when all at once he walked up to them quite merrilyand boldly.  The giants were terrified, they were afraid that hewould strike them all dead, and ran away in a great hurry.The little tailor went onwards, always following his ownpointed nose.  After he had walked for a long time, he came to thecourtyard of a royal palace, and as he felt weary, he lay downon the grass and fell asleep.  Whilst he lay there, the peoplecame and inspected him on all sides, and read on his girdle,seven at one stroke.  Ah, said they, what does the great warriorhere in the midst of peace.  He must be a mighty lord.  They wentand announced him to the king, and gave it as their opinion thatif war should break out, this would be a weighty and useful manwho ought on no account to be allowed to depart.  The counselpleased the king, and he sent one of his courtiers to the littletailor to offer him military service when he awoke.  Theambassador remained standing by the sleeper, waited until hestretched his limbs andopened his eyes, and then conveyed to him this proposal.  For thisreason have I come here, the tailor replied, I am ready to enterthe king's service.  He was therefore honorably received and aspecial dwelling was assigned him.The soldiers, however, were set against the little tailor, andwished him a thousand miles away.  What is to be the end of this,they said among themselves.  If we quarrel with him, and he strikesabout him, seven of us will fall at every blow, not one ofus can stand against him.  They came therefore to a decision,betook themselves in a body to the king, and begged for theirdismissal.  We are not prepared, said they, to stay with a manwho kills seven at one stroke.  The king was sorry that for thesake of one he should lose all his faithful servants, wished thathe had never set eyes on the tailor, and would willingly havebeen rid of him again.  But he did not venture to give him hisdismissal, for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all hispeople dead, and place himself on the royal throne.  He thoughtabout it for a long time, and at last found good counsel.  Hesent to the little tailor and caused him to be informed that ashe was such a great warrior, he had one request to make of him.In a forest of his country lived two giants who caused greatmischief with their robbing, murdering, ravaging, and burning,and no one could approach them without putting himself in dangerof death.  If the tailor conquered and killed these two giants,he would give him his only daughter to wife, and half of hiskingdom as a dowry, likewise one hundred horsemen should go withhim to assist him.  That would indeed be a fine thing for a manlike me, thought the little tailor.  One is not offered abeautiful princess and half a kingdom every day of one's life.Oh, yes, he replied, I will soon subdue the giants, and do notrequire the help of the hundred horsemen to do it, he who canhit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of two.The little tailor went forth, and the hundred horsemen followedhim.  When he came to the outskirts of the forest, he said tohis followers, just stay waiting here, I alone will soon finishoff the giants.  Then he bounded into the forest and looked aboutright and left.  After a while he perceived both giants.  They laysleeping under a tree, and snored so that the branches waved upand down.  The little tailor, not idle, gathered two pocketsfulof stones, and with these climbed up the tree.  When he washalf-way up, he slipped down by a branch, until he sat just abovethe sleepers, and then let one stone after another fall on thebreast of one of the giants.  For a long time the giant feltnothing, but at last he awoke, pushed his comrade, and said, whyare you knocking me.  You must be dreaming, said the other, I amnot knocking you.  They laid themselves down to sleep again, andthen the tailor threw a stone down on the second.  What is themeaning of this, cried the other.  Why are you pelting me.  I amnot pelting you, answered the first, growling.  They disputedabout it for a time, but as they were weary they let the matterrest, and their eyes closed once more.  The little tailor beganhis game again, picked out the biggest stone, and threw it withall his might on the breast of the first giant.  That is toobad, cried he, and sprang up like a madman, and pushed hiscompanion against the tree until it shook.  The other paid himback in the same coin, and they got into such a rage that theytore up trees and belabored each other so long, that at last theyboth fell down dead on the ground at the same time.  Then thelittle tailor leapt down.  It is a lucky thing, said he, thatthey did not tear up the tree on which I was sitting, or I shouldhave had to spring on to another like a squirrel, but we tailorsare nimble.  He drew out his sword and gave each of them a coupleof thrusts in the breast, and then went out to the horsemen andsaid, the work is done, I have finished both of them off, but itwas hard work.  They tore up trees in their sore need, anddefended themselves with them, but all that is to no purposewhen a man like myself comes, who can kill seven at one blow.But you are not wounded, asked the horsemen.  You need notconcern yourself about that, answered the tailor, they have notbent one hair of mine.  The horsemen would not believe him, androde into the forest, there they found the giants swimming in theirblood, and all round about lay the torn-up trees.The little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward.  He,however, repented of his promise, and again bethought himself howhe could get rid of the hero.  Before you receive my daughter,and the half of my kingdom, said he to him, you must perform onemore heroic deed.  In the forest roams a unicorn which does greatharm, and you must catch it first.  I fear one unicorn stillless than two giants.  Seven at one blow, is my kind of affair.He took a rope and an axe with him, went forth into the forest,and again bade those who were sent with him to wait outside.  Hehad not long to seek.  The unicorn soon came towards him, andrushed directly on the tailor, as if it would gore him with itshorn without more ado.  Softly, softly, it can't be done asquickly as that, said he, and stood still and waited until theanimal was quite close, and then sprang nimbly behind the tree.The unicorn ran against the tree with all its strength, andstruck its horn so fast in the trunk that it had not strengthenough to draw it out again, and thus it was caught.  Now, I havegot the bird, said the tailor, and came out from behind the treeand put the rope round its neck, and then with his axe he hewedthe horn out of the tree, and when all was ready he led the beastaway and took it to the king.The king still would not give him the promised reward, and madea third demand.  Before the wedding the tailor was to catch him awild boar that made great havoc in the forest, and the huntsmenshould give him their help.  Willingly, said the tailor, that ischild's play.  He did not take the huntsmen with him into theforest, and they were well pleased that he did not, for the wildboar had several times received them in such a manner that theyhad no inclination to lie in wait for him.  When the boarperceived the tailor, it ran on him with foaming mouth andwhetted tusks, and was about to throw him to the ground, but thehero fled and sprang into a chapel which was near, and up to thewindow at once, and in one bound out again.  The boar ran inafter him, but the tailor ran round outside and shut the doorbehind it, and then the raging beast, which was much too heavyand awkward to leap out of the window, was caught.  The littletailor called the huntsmen thitherthat they might see the prisoner with their own eyes.  The hero,however went to the king, who was now, whether he liked it ornot, obliged to keep his promise, and gave him his daughter andthe half of his kingdom.  Had he known that it was no warlikehero, but a little tailor who was standing before him it wouldhave gone to his heart still more than it did.  The wedding washeld with great magnificence and small joy, and out of atailor a king was made.After some time the young queen heard her husband say in hisdreams at night, boy, make me the doublet, and patch thepantaloons, or else I will rap the yard-measure over your ears.Then she discovered in what state of life the young lord had beenborn, and next morning complained of her wrongs to her father, andbegged him to help her to get rid of her husband, who wasnothing else but a tailor.  The king comforted her and said,leave your bedroom door open this night, and my servants shallstand outside, and when he has fallen asleep shall go in, bindhim, and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into thewide world.  The woman was satisfied with this, but the king'sarmor-bearer, who had heard all, was friendly with the younglord, and informed him of the whole plot.  I'll put a screw intothat business, said the little tailor.  At night he went to bedwith his wife at the usual time, and when she thought that hehad fallen asleep, she got up, opened the door, and then lay downagain.  The little tailor, who was only pretending to be asleep,began to cry out in a clear voice, boy, make me the doublet andpatch me the pantaloons, or I will rap the yard-measure overyour ears.  I smote seven at one blow.  I killed two giants, Ibrought away one unicorn and caught a wild boar, and am I tofear those who are standing outside the room.  When these menheard the tailor speaking thus, they were overcome by a greatdread, and ran as if the wild huntsman were behind them, and noneof them would venture anything further against him.  So the littletailor was and remained a king to the end of his life.	CinderellaThe wife of a rich man fell sick, and as she felt that her endwas drawing near, she called her only daughter to her bedside andsaid, dear child, be good and pious, and then thegood God will always protect you, and I will look down on youfrom heaven and be near you.  Thereupon she closed her eyes anddeparted.  Every day the maiden went out to her mother's grave,and wept, and she remained pious and good.  When winter camethe snow spread a white sheet over the grave, and by the time thespring sun had drawn it off again, the man had taken another wife.The woman had brought with her into the house two daughters,who were beautiful and fair of face, but vile and black of heart.Now began a bad time for the poor step-child.  Is the stupid gooseto sit in the parlor with us, they said.  He who wants to eat breadmust earn it.  Out with the kitchen-wench.  They took her prettyclothes away from her, put an old grey bedgown on her, and gaveher wooden shoes.  Just look at the proud princess, how deckedout she is, they cried, and laughed, and led her into the kitchen.There she had to do hard work from morning till night, get upbefore daybreak, carry water, light fires, cook and wash.  Besidesthis, the sisters did her every imaginable injury - they mocked herand emptied her peas and lentils into the ashes, so that she wasforced to sit and pick them out again.  In the evening when she hadworked till she was weary she had no bed to go to, but had to sleepby the hearth in the cinders.  And as on that account she alwayslooked dusty and dirty, they called her cinderella.It happened that the father was once going to the fair, and heasked his two step-daughters what he should bring back for them.Beautiful dresses, said one, pearls and jewels, said the second.And you, cinderella, said he, what will you have.  Fatherbreak off for me the first branch which knocks against your hat onyour way home.  So he bought beautiful dresses, pearls and jewelsfor his two step-daughters, and on his way home, as he was ridingthrough a green thicket, a hazel twig brushed against him andknocked off his hat.  Then he broke off the branch and took it withhim.  When he reached home he gave his step-daughters the thingswhich they had wished for, and to cinderella he gave the branchfrom the hazel-bush.  Cinderella thanked him, went to her mother'sgrave and planted the branch on it, and wept so much that the tearsfell down on it and watered it.  And it grew and became a handsometree. Thrice a day cinderella went and sat beneath it, and wept andprayed, and a little white bird always came on the tree, and ifcinderella expressed a wish, the bird threw down to her what shehad wished for.It happened, however, that the king gave orders for a festivalwhich was to last three days, and to which all the beautiful younggirls in the country were invited, in order that his son might choosehimself a bride.  When the two step-sisters heard that they too wereto appear among the number, they were delighted, called cinderellaand said, comb our hair for us, brush our shoes and fasten ourbuckles, for we are going to the wedding at the king's palace.Cinderella obeyed, but wept, because she too would have liked togo with them to the dance, and begged her step-mother to allowher to do so.  You go, cinderella, said she, covered in dust anddirt as you are, and would go to the festival.  You have no clothesand shoes, and yet would dance.  As, however, cinderella went onasking, the step-mother said at last, I have emptied a dish oflentils into the ashes for you, if you have picked them out again intwo hours, you shall go with us.  The maiden went through theback-door into the garden, and called, you tame pigeons, youturtle-doves, and all you birds beneath the sky, come and help meto pick     the good into the pot,     the bad into the crop.Then two white pigeons came in by the kitchen window, andafterwards the turtle-doves, and at last all the birds beneath thesky, came whirring and crowding in, and alighted amongst the ashes.And the pigeons nodded with their heads and began pick, pick,pick, pick, and the rest began also pick, pick, pick, pick, andgathered all the good grains into the dish.  Hardly had one hourpassed before they had finished, and all flew out again.  Then thegirl took the dish to her step-mother, and was glad, and believedthat now she would be allowed to go with them to the festival.But the step-mother said, no, cinderella, you have no clothes andyou can not dance.  You would only be laughed at.  And ascinderella wept at this, the step-mother said, if you can pick twodishes of lentils out of the ashes for me in one hour, you shall gowith us.  And she thought to herself, that she most certainlycannot do again.  When the step-mother had emptied the twodishes of lentils amongst the ashes, the maiden went through theback-door into the garden and cried, you tame pigeons, youturtle-doves, and all you birds beneath the sky, come and help meto pick     the good into the pot,     the bad into the crop.Then two white pigeons came in by the kitchen-window, andafterwards the turtle-doves, and at length all the birds beneath thesky, came whirring and crowding in, and alighted amongst theashes.  And the doves nodded with their heads and began pick,pick, pick, pick, and the others began also pick, pick, pick, pick,and gathered all the good seeds into the dishes, and before half anhour was over they had already finished, and all flew out again.Then the maiden was delighted, and believed that she might now gowith them to the wedding.  But the step-mother said, all this willnot help.  You cannot go with us, for you have no clothes and cannot dance.  We should be ashamed of you.  On this she turned herback on cinderella, and hurried away with her two proud daughters.As no one was now at home, cinderella went to her mother'sgrave beneath the hazel-tree, and cried -     shiver and quiver, little tree,     silver and gold throw down over me.Then the bird threw a gold and silver dress down to her, andslippers embroidered with silk and silver.  She put on the dresswith all speed, and went to the wedding.  Her step-sisters and thestep-mother however did not know her, and thought she must be aforeign princess, for she looked so beautiful in the golden dress.They never once thought of cinderella, and believed that she wassitting at home in the dirt, picking lentils out of the ashes.  Theprince approached her, took her by the hand and danced with her.He would dance with no other maiden, and never let loose of herhand, and if any one else came to invite her, he said, this is mypartner.She danced till it was evening, and then she wanted to go home.But the king's son said, I will go with you and bear you company,for he wished to see to whom the beautiful maiden belonged.She escaped from him, however, and sprang into thepigeon-house.  The king's son waited until her father came, andthen he told him that the unknown maiden had leapt into thepigeon-house.  The old man thought, can it be cinderella.  Andthey had to bring him an axe and a pickaxe that he might hewthe pigeon-house to pieces, but no one was inside it.  And when theygot home cinderella lay in her dirty clothes among the ashes, anda dim little oil-lamp was burning on the mantle-piece, forcinderella had jumped quickly down from the back of the pigeon-houseand had run to the little hazel-tree, and there she had taken offher beautiful clothes and laid them on the grave, and the bird hadtaken them away again, and then she had seated herself in thekitchen amongst the ashes in her grey gown.Next day when the festival began afresh, and her parents andthe step-sisters had gone once more, cinderella went to thehazel-tree and said -     shiver and quiver, my little tree,     silver and gold throw down over me.Then the bird threw down a much more beautiful dress than onthe preceding day. And when cinderella appeared at the weddingin this dress, every one was astonished at her beauty.  The king'sson had waited until she came, and instantly took her by the handand danced with no one but her.  When others came and invitedher, he said, this is my partner.  When evening came she wishedto leave, and the king's son followed her and wanted to see intowhich house she went.  But she sprang away from him, and intothe garden behind the house.  Therein stood a beautiful tall tree onwhich hung the most magnificent pears.  She clambered so nimblybetween the branches like a squirrel that the king's son did notknow where she was gone.  He waited until her father came, andsaid to him, the unknown maiden has escaped from me, and Ibelieve she has climbed up the pear-tree.  The father thought,can it be cinderella.  And had an axe brought and cut thetree down, but no one was on it.  And when they got into thekitchen, cinderella lay there among the ashes, as usual, for shehad jumped down on the other side of the tree, had taken thebeautiful dress to the bird on the little hazel-tree, and put on hergrey gown.On the third day, when the parents and sisters had gone away,cinderella went once more to her mother's grave and said to thelittle tree -     shiver and quiver, my little tree,     silver and gold throw down over me.And now the bird threw down to her a dress which was moresplendid and magnificent than any she had yet had, and theslippers were golden.  And when she went to the festival in thedress, no one knew how to speak for astonishment.  The king's sondanced with her only, and if any one invited her to dance, he saidthis is my partner.When evening came, cinderella wished to leave, and the king'sson was anxious to go with her, but she escaped from him so quicklythat he could not follow her.  The king's son, however, hademployed a ruse, and had caused the whole staircase to be smearedwith pitch, and there, when she ran down, had the maiden's leftslipper remained stuck.  The king's son picked it up, and it wassmall and dainty, and all golden.  Next morning, he went with it tothe father, and said to him, no one shall be my wife but she whosefoot this golden slipper fits.  Then were the two sisters glad,for they had pretty feet.  The eldest went with the shoe into herroom and wanted to try it on, and her mother stood by.  But shecould not get her big toe into it, and the shoe was too small forher.  Then her mother gave her a knife and said, cut the toe off,when you are queen you will have no more need to go on foot.  Themaiden cut the toe off, forced the foot into the shoe, swallowedthe pain, and went out to the king's son.  Then he took her on hishis horse as his bride and rode away with her.  They wereobliged, however, to pass the grave, and there, on the hazel-tree,sat the two pigeons and cried -     turn and peep, turn and peep,     there's blood within the shoe,     the shoe it is too small for her,     the true bride waits for you.Then he looked at her foot and saw how the blood was tricklingfrom it.  He turned his horse round and took the false bridehome again, and said she was not the true one, and that theother sister was to put the shoe on.  Then this one went into herchamber and got her toes safely into the shoe, but her heel wastoo large.  So her mother gave her a knife and said,  cut a bitoff your heel, when you are queen you will have no more needto go on foot.  The maiden cut a bit off her heel, forcedher foot into the shoe, swallowed the pain, and went out to theking's son.  He took her on his horse as his bride, and rode awaywith her, but when they passed by the hazel-tree, the two pigeonssat on it and cried -     turn and peep, turn and peep,     there's blood within the shoe,     the shoe it is too small for her,     the true bride waits for you.He looked down at her foot and saw how the blood was runningout of her shoe, and how it had stained her white stocking quitered.  Then he turned his horse and took the false bride homeagain.  This also is not the right one, said he, have you noother daughter.  No, said the man, there is still a littlestunted kitchen-wench which my late wife left behind her, butshe cannot possibly be the bride.  The king's son said he wasto send her up to him, but the mother answered, oh, no, she ismuch too dirty, she cannot show herself.  But he absolutelyinsisted on it, and cinderella had to be called.  She firstwashed her hands and face clean, and then went and bowed downbefore the king's son, who gave her the golden shoe.  Then sheseated herself on a stool, drew her foot out of the heavywooden shoe, and put it into the slipper, which fitted like aglove.  And when she rose up and the king's son looked at herface he recognized the beautiful maiden who had danced withhim and cried, that is the true bride.  The step-mother andthe two sisters were horrified and became pale with rage, he,however, took cinderella on his horse and rode away with her.  Asthey passed by the hazel-tree, the two white doves cried -     turn and peep, turn and peep,     no blood is in the shoe,     the shoe is not too small for her,     the true bride rides with you,and when they had cried that, the two came flying down andplaced themselves on cinderella's shoulders, one on the right,the other on the left, and remained sitting there.When the wedding with the king's son was to be celebrated, thetwo false sisters came and wanted to get into favor withcinderella and share her good fortune.  When the betrothedcouple went to church, the elder was at the right side and theyounger at the left, and the pigeons pecked out one eye fromeach of them.  Afterwards as they came back the elder was atthe left, and the younger at the right, and then the pigeonspecked out the other eye from each.  And thus, for theirwickedness and falsehood, they were punished with blindnessall their days.There was once a king's son who was seized with a desire to travelabout the world, and took no one with him but a faithful servant.One day he came to a great forest, and when darkness overtook himhe could find no shelter, and knew not where to pass the night.Then he saw a girl who was going towards a small house, and whenhe came nearer, he saw that the maiden was young and beautiful.He spoke to her, and said, dear child, can I and my servant findshelter for the night in the little house.  Oh, yes, said thegirl in a sad voice, that you certainly can, but I do not adviseyou to venture it.  Do not go in.  Why not, asked the king's son.The maiden sighed and said, my step-motherpractises wicked arts.  She is ill-disposed toward strangers.Then he saw very well that he had come to the house of a witch,but as it was dark, and he could not go farther, and also wasnot afraid, he entered.  The old woman was sitting in an armchairby the fire, and looked at the stranger with her red eyes.  Goodevening, growled she, and pretended to be quite friendly.  Takea seat and rest yourselves.  She fanned the fire on which she wascooking something in a small pot.  The daughter warned the two tobe prudent, to eat nothing, and drink nothing, for the old womanbrewed evil drinks.  They slept quietly until early morning.  Whenthey were making ready for their departure, and the king's son wasalready seated on his horse, the old woman said, stop a moment,I will first hand you a parting draught.  Whilst she fetchedit, the king's son rode away, and the servant who had to bucklehis saddle tight, was the only one present when the wicked witchcame with the drink.  Take that to your master, said she.  Butat that instant the glass broke and the poison spirted on thehorse, and it was so strong that the animal immediately fell downdead.  The servant ran after his master and told him what hadhappened, but as he did not want to leave his saddle behind, heran back to fetch it.  When he came to the dead horse, however,a raven was already sitting on it devouring it.  Who knowswhether we shall find anything better to-day, said the servant.So he killed the raven, and took it with him.  And now theyjourneyed onwards into the forest the whole day, but could notget out of it.  By nightfall they found an inn and entered it.The servant gave the raven to the innkeeper to prepare for supper.They had stumbled, however, on a den of murderers, and duringthe darkness twelve of these came, intending to kill the strangersand rob them.  But before they set about this work, they sat downto supper, and the innkeeper and the witch sat down with them,and together they ate a dish of soup in which was cut up theflesh of the raven.  Hardly had they swallowed a couple ofmouthfuls, before they all fell down dead, for the raven hadcommunicated to them the poison from the horse-flesh.  Therewas no no one else left in the house but the innkeeper's daughter,who washonest, and had taken no part in their godless deeds.  Sheopened all doors to the stranger and showed him the store oftreasures.  But the king's son said she might keep everything, hewould have none of it, and rode onwards with his servant.After they had traveled about for a long time, they came to atown in which was a beautiful but proud princess, who had made itknown that whosoever should set her a riddle which she couldnot guess, that man should be her husband.  But if she guessedit, his head must be cut off.  She had three days to guess itin, but was so clever that she always found the answer to theriddle given her before the appointed time.  Nine suitors hadalready perished in this manner, when the king's son arrived, andblinded by her great beauty, was willing to stake his life forit.  Then he went to her and laid his riddle before her.  Whatis this, said he.  One slew none, and yet slew twelve.  Shedid not know what that was.  She thought and thought, but shecould not solve it.  She opened her riddle-books, but it wasnot in them - in short, her wisdom was at an end.  As shedid not know how to help herself, she ordered her maid tocreep into the lord's sleeping-chamber, and listen to hisdreams, and thought that he would perhaps speak in his sleepand reveal the riddle.  But the clever servant had placedhimself in the bed instead of his master, and when the maidcame there, he tore off from her the mantle in which she hadwrapped herself, and chased her out with rods.  The second nightthe king's daughter sent her maid-in-waiting, who was to seeif she could succeed better in listening, but the servanttook her mantle also away from her, and hunted her out withrods.  Now the master believed himself safe for the thirdnight, and lay down in his own bed.  Then came the princessherself, and she had put on a misty-grey mantle, and sheseated herself near him.  And when she thought that he wasasleep and dreaming, she spoke to him, and hoped that hewould answer in his sleep, as many do, but he was awake, andunderstood and heard everything quite well.  Then she asked,one slew none, what is that.  He replied, a raven, whichate of a dead and poisoned horse, and died of it.  Sheinquired further, and yet slew twelve, what is that.  Heanswered, that means twelve murderers, who ate the raven and diedof it.When she knew the answer to the riddle she wanted to stealaway, but he held her mantle so fast that she was forced toleave it behind her.  Next morning, the king's daughterannounced that she had guessed the riddle, and sent for thetwelve judges and expounded it before them.  But the youthbegged for a hearing, and said, she stole into my room in thenight and questioned me, otherwise she could not havediscovered it.  The judges said, bring us a proof of this.Then were the three mantles brought thither by the servant,and when the judges saw the misty-grey one which the king'sdaughter usually wore, they said, let the mantle beembroidered with gold and silver, and then it will be yourwedding-mantle.There was once a widow who had two daughters - one ofwhom was pretty and industrious, whilst the other was uglyand idle.  But she was much fonder of the ugly and idle one,because she was her own daughter.  And the other, who was astep-daughter, was obliged to do all the work, and be thecinderella of the house.  Every day the poor girl had to sit by awell, in the highway, and spin and spin till her fingers bled.Now it happened that one day the shuttle was marked with herblood, so she dipped it in the well, to wash the mark off, but itdropped out of her hand and fell to the bottom.  She began toweep, and ran to her step-mother and told her of the mishap.  Butshe scolded her sharply, and was so merciless as to say, sinceyou have let the shuttle fall in, you must fetch it out again.So the girl went back to the well, and did not know what to do.And in the sorrow of her heart she jumped into the well to get theshuttle.  She lost her senses.  And when she awoke and came toherself again, she was in a lovely meadow where the sun wasshining and many thousands of flowers were growing.  Across thismeadow she went, and at last came to a baker's oven full of bread,and the bread cried out, oh, take me out. Take me out. Or I shallburn.  I have been baked a long time.  So she went up to it, andtook out all the loaves one after another with the bread-shovel.After that she went on till she came to a tree covered with apples,which called out to her,  oh, shake me. Shake me. We apples areall ripe.  So she shook the tree till the apples fell like rain,and went on shaking till they were all down, and when she hadgathered them into a heap, she went on her way.At last she came to a little house, out of which an old womanpeeped.  But she had such large teeth that the girl wasfrightened, and was about to run away.  But the old woman calledout to her, what are you afraid of, dear child.  Stay with me.If you will do all the work in the house properly, you shall bethe better for it.  Only you must take care to make my bed well,and shake it thoroughly till the feathers fly - for then thereis snow on the earth.  I am mother holle.As the old woman spoke so kindly to her, the girl took courageand agreed to enter her service.  She attended to everything to thesatisfaction of her mistress, and always shook her bed so vigorouslythat the feathers flew about like snow-flakes.  So she had apleasant life with her.  Never an angry word.  And to eat she hadboiled or roast meat every day.She stayed some time with mother holle, before she became sad.At first she did not know what was the matter with her, but foundat length that it was home-sickness.  Although she was many thousandtimes better off here than at home, still she had a longing to bethere.  At last she said to the old woman, I have a longing forhome, and however well off I am down here, I cannot stay anylonger.  I must go up again to my own people.  Mother holle said,I am pleased that you long for your home again, and as you haveserved me so truly, I myself will take you up again.  Thereuponshe took her by the hand, and led her to a large door.  The doorwas opened, and just as the maiden was standing beneath thedoorway, a heavy shower of golden rain fell, and all the gold clungto her, so that she was completely covered over with it.You shall have that because you have been so industrious, saidmother holle, and at the same time she gave her back the shuttlewhich she had let fall into the well.  Thereupon the door closed,and the maiden found herself up above upon the earth, not farfrom her mother's house.And as she went into the yard the cock was sitting on the well,and cried -     cock-a-doodle-doo.     Your golden girl's come back to you.So she went in to her mother, and as she arrived thus covered withgold, she was well received, both by her and her sister.The girl told all that had happened to her, and as soon as themother heard how she had come by so much wealth, she was veryanxious to obtain the same good luck for the ugly and lazy daughter.She had to seat herself by the well and spin.  And in order thather shuttle might be stained with blood, she stuck her hand into athorn bush and pricked her finger.  Then she threw her shuttleinto the well, and jumped in after it.She came, like the other, to the beautiful meadow and walkedalong the very same path.  When she got to the oven the bread againcried, oh, take me out. Take me out. Or I shall burn.  I have beenbaked a long time.  But the lazy thing answered, as if I had anywish to make myself dirty. And on she went.  Soon she came to theapple-tree, which cried, oh, shake me. Shake me. We apples are allripe.  But she answered, I like that.  One of you might fall onmy head, and so went on.  When she came to mother holle's houseshe was not afraid, for she had already heard of her big teeth, andshe hired herself to her immediately.The first day she forced herself to work diligently, and obeyedmother holle when she told her to do anything, for she was thinkingof all the gold that she would give her.  But on the second dayshe began to be lazy, and on the third day still more so, and thenshe would not get up in the morning at all.  Neither did she makemother holle's bed as she ought, and did not shake it so as tomake the feathers fly up.  Mother holle was soon tired of this, andgave her notice to leave.  The lazy girl was willing enough to go,and thought that now the golden rain would come.  Mother holle ledher also to the great door, but while she was standing beneath it,instead of the gold a big kettleful of pitch was emptied over her.That is the reward for your service, said mother holle, and shutthe door.So the lazy girl went home, but she was quite covered with pitch,and the cock on the well, as soon as he saw her, cried out -     cock-a-doodle-doo.     Your dirty girl's come back to you.But the pitch clung fast to her, and could not be got off as longas she lived.There was once a man who had seven sons, and still he hadno daughter, however much he wished for one.  At length hiswife again gave him hope of a child, and when it came intothe world it was a girl.  The joy was great, but the child wassickly and small, and had to be privately baptized on account ofits weakness.  The father sent one of the boys in haste to thespring to fetch water for the baptism.  The other six went withhim, and as each of them wanted to be first to fill it, the jugfell into the well.  There they stood and did not know what to do,and none of them dared to go home.  As they still did not return,the father grew impatient, and said, they have certainly forgottenit while playing some game, the wicked boys.  He became afraid thatthe girl would have to die without being baptized, and in hisanger cried, I wish the boys were all turned into ravens.  Hardlywas the word spoken before he heard a whirring of wings over hishead, looked up and saw seven coal-black ravens flying away.
The parents could not withdraw the curse, and however sad theywere at the loss of their seven sons, they still to some extentcomforted themselves with their dear little daughter, who soongrew strong and every day became more beautiful.  For a long timeshe did not know that she had had brothers, for her parents werecareful not to mention them before her, but one day sheaccidentally heard some people saying of herself, that the girl wascertainly beautiful, but that in reality she was to blame for themisfortune which had befallen her seven brothers.  Then she was muchtroubled, and went to her father and mother and asked if it wastrue that she had had brothers, and what had become of them.  Theparents now dared keep the secret no longer, but said that whathad befallen her brothers was the will of heaven, and that herbirth had only been the innocent cause.  But the maiden took it toheart daily, and thought she must save her brothers.  She had norest or peace until she set out secretly, and went forth into thewide world to search for her brothers and set them free, let itcost what it might.  She took nothing with her but a little ringbelonging to her parents as a keepsake, a loaf of bread againsthunger, a little pitcher of water against thirst, and a littlechair as a provision against weariness.
And now she went continually onwards, far, far to the very end ofthe world.  Then she came to the sun, but it was too hot andterrible, and devoured little children.  Hastily she ran away, andran to the moon, but it was far too cold, and also awful andmalicious, and when it saw the child, it said, I smell, I smellthe flesh of men.  At this she ran swiftly away, and came to thestars, which were kind and good to her, and each of them sat on itsown particular little chair.  But the morning star arose, and gaveher the drumstick of a chicken, and said, if you have not thatdrumstick you can not open the glass mountain, and in the glassmountain are your brothers.
The maiden took the drumstick, wrapped it carefully in a cloth,and went onwards again until she came to the glass mountain.  Thedoor was shut, and she thought she would take out the drumstick.But when she undid the cloth, it was empty, and she had lost thegood star's present.  What was she now to do.  She wished to rescueher brothers, and had no key to the glass mountain.  The goodsister took a knife, cut off one of her little fingers, put it inthe door, and succeeded in opening it.  When she had gone inside, alittle dwarf came to meet her, who said, my child, what are youlooking for.  I am looking for my brothers, the seven ravens, shereplied.  The dwarf said, the lord ravens are not at home, but ifyou will wait here until they come, step in.  Thereupon the littledwarf carried the ravens' dinner in, on seven little plates, andin seven little glasses, and the little sister ate a morsel fromeach plate, and from each little glass she took a sip, but in thelast little glass she dropped the ring which she had brought awaywith her.
Suddenly she heard a whirring of wings and a rushing throughthe air, and then the little dwarf said, now the lord ravens areflying home.  Then they came, and wanted to eat and drink, andlooked for their little plates and glasses.  Then said one afterthe other, who has eaten something from my plate.  Who has drunkout of my little glass.  It was a human mouth.  And when theseventh came to the bottom of the glass, the ring rolled againsthis mouth.  Then he looked at it, and saw that it was a ringbelonging to his father and mother, and said, God grant that oursister may be here, and then we shall be free.  When the maiden,who was standing behind the door watching, heard that wish,she came forth, and on this all the ravens were restored to theirhuman form again.  And they embraced and kissed each other,and went joyfully home.	Little Red-Cap
Once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was lovedby every one who looked at her, but most of all by hergrandmother, and there was nothing that she would not havegiven to the child.  Once she gave her a little cap of redvelvet, which suited her so well that she would never wearanything else.  So she was always called little red-cap.
One day her mother said to her, come, little red-cap, hereis a piece of cake and a bottle of wine.  Take them to yourgrandmother, she is ill and weak, and they will do her good.Set out before it gets hot, and when you are going, walknicely and quietly and do not run off the path, or you mayfall and break the bottle, and then your grandmother willget nothing.  And when you go into her room, don't forgetto say, good-morning, and don't peep into every corner beforeyou do it.
I will take great care, said little red-cap to her mother, andgave her hand on it.
The grandmother lived out in the wood, half a league from thevillage, and just as little red-cap entered the wood, a wolfmet her.  Red-cap did not know what a wicked creature he was,and was not at all afraid of him.
"Good-day, little red-cap," said he.
"Thank you kindly, wolf."
"Whither away so early, little red-cap?"
"To my grandmother's."
"What have you got in your apron?"
"Cake and wine.  Yesterday was baking-day, so poor sickgrandmother is to have something good, to make her stronger."
"Where does your grandmother live, little red-cap?"
"A good quarter of a league farther on in the wood.  Her housestands under the three large oak-trees, the nut-trees are justbelow.  You surely must know it," replied little red-cap.
The wolf thought to himself, what a tender young creature.  What anice plump mouthful, she will be better to eat than the oldwoman.  I must act craftily, so as to catch both.  So he walkedfor a short time by the side of little red-cap, and then hesaid, "see little red-cap, how pretty the flowers are about here.Why do you not look round.  I believe, too, that you do nothear how sweetly the little birds are singing.  You walk gravelyalong as if you were going to school, while everything else outhere in the wood is merry."
Little red-cap raised her eyes, and when she saw the sunbeamsdancing here and there through the trees, and pretty flowersgrowing everywhere, she thought, suppose I take grandmother afresh nosegay.  That would please her too.  It is so early in theday that I shall still get there in good time.  And so she ranfrom the path into the wood to look for flowers.  And whenevershe had picked one, she fancied that she saw a still prettier onefarther on, and ran after it, and so got deeper and deeper intothe wood.
Meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother's house andknocked at the door.
"Who is there?"
"Little red-cap," replied the wolf.  "She is bringing cake andwine.  Open the door."
"Lift the latch," called out the grandmother, "I am too weak, andcannot get up."
The wolf lifted the latch, the door sprang open, and withoutsaying a word he went straight to the grandmother's bed, anddevoured her.  Then he put on her clothes, dressed himself inher cap, laid himself in bed and drew the curtains.
Little red-cap, however, had been running about picking flowers,and when she had gathered so many that she could carryno more, she remembered her grandmother, and set out on theway to her.
She was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open, andwhen she went into the room, she had such a strange feeling thatshe said to herself, oh dear, how uneasy I feel to-day, and atother times I like being with grandmother so much.  She calledout, "good morning," but received no answer.  So she went to thebed and drew back the curtains.  There lay her grandmother withher cap pulled far over her face, and looking very strange.
"Oh, grandmother," she said, "what big ears you have."
"The better to hear you with, my child," was the reply.
"But, grandmother, what big eyes you have," she said.
"The better to see you with," my dear.
"But, grandmother, what large hands you have."
"The better to hug you with."
"Oh, but, grandmother, what a terrible big mouth you have."
"The better to eat you with."
And scarcely had the wolf said this, than with one bound he wasout of bed and swallowed up red-cap.
When the wolf had appeased his appetite, he lay down again inthe bed, fell asleep and began to snore very loud.  Thehuntsman was just passing the house, and thought to himself, howthe old woman is snoring.  I must just see if she wants anything.
So he went into the room, and when he came to the bed, he sawthat the wolf was lying in it.  Do I find you here, you oldsinner, said he.  I have long sought you.  Then just as he was goingto fire at him, it occurred to him that the wolf might havedevoured the grandmother, and that she might still be saved, sohe did not fire, but took a pair of scissors, and began to cutopen the stomach of the sleeping wolf.  When he had made twosnips, he saw the little red-cap shining, and then he made twosnips more, and the little girl sprang out, crying, ah, howfrightened I have been.  How dark it was inside the wolf.  Andafter that the aged grandmother came out alive also, but scarcelyable to breathe.  Red-cap, however, quicklyfetched great stones with which they filled the wolf's belly, andwhen he awoke, he wanted to run away, but the stones were soheavy that he collapsed at once, and fell dead.
Then all three were delighted.  The huntsman drew off the wolf'sskin and went home with it.  The grandmother ate the cake anddrank the wine which red-cap had brought, and revived, butred-cap thought to herself, as long as I live, I will never bymyself leave the path, to run into the wood, when my mother hasforbidden me to do so.
It is also related that once when red-cap was again taking cakesto the old grandmother, another wolf spoke to her, and tried toentice her from the path.  Red-cap, however, was on her guard,and went straight forward on her way, and told her grandmotherthat she had met the wolf, and that he had said good-morning toher, but with such a wicked look in his eyes, that if they hadnot been on the public road she was certain he would have eatenher up.  Well, said the grandmother, we will shut the door, thathe may not come in.  Soon afterwards the wolf knocked, and cried,open the door, grandmother, I am little red-cap, and am bringingyou some cakes.  But they did not speak, or open the door, sothe grey-beard stole twice or thrice round the house, and at lastjumped on the roof, intending to wait until red-cap went home inthe evening, and then to steal after her and devour her in thedarkness.  But the grandmother saw what was in his thoughts.  Infront of the house was a great stone trough, so she said to thechild, take the pail, red-cap.  I made some sausages yesterday,so carry the water in which I boiled them to the trough.  Red-capcarried until the great trough was quite full.   Then the smellof the sausages reached the wolf, and he sniffed and peepeddown, and at last stretched out his neck so far that he couldno longer keep his footing and began to slip, and slipped downfrom the roof straight into the great trough, and was drowned.But red-cap went joyously home, and no one ever did anythingto harm her again.In a certain country there was once great lamentation over awild boar that laid waste the farmer's fields, killed the cattle,and ripped up people's bodies with his tusks.  The king promiseda large reward to anyone who would free the land from this plague,but the beast was so big and strong that no one dared to go nearthe forest in which it lived.  At last the king gave noticethat whosoever should capture or kill the wild boar should havehis only daughter to wife.
Now there lived in the country two brothers, sons of a poor man,who declared themselves willing to undertake the hazardousenterprise, the elder, who was crafty and shrewd, out of pride,the younger, who was innocent and simple, from a kind heart.The king said, in order that you may be the more sure of findingthe beast, you must go into the forest from opposite sides.  Sothe elder went in on the west side, and the younger on the east.When the younger had gone a short way, a little man steppedup to him.  He held in his hand a black spear and said, I giveyou this spear because your heart is pure and good, with thisyou can boldly attack the wild boar, and it will do you no harm.He thanked the little man, shouldered the spear, and went onfearlessly.
Before long he saw the beast, which rushed at him, but he heldthe spear towards it, and in its blind fury it ran so swiftlyagainst it that its heart was cloven in twain.  Then he took themonster on his back and went homewards with it to the king.As he came out at the other side of the wood, there stood at theentrance a house where people were making merry with wine anddancing.  His elder brother had gone in here, and, thinking thatafter all the boar would not run away from him, was going to drinkuntil he felt brave.  But when he saw his young brother coming outof the wood laden with his booty, his envious, evil heart gave himno peace.  He called out to him, come in, dear brother, rest andrefresh yourself with a cup of wine.
The youth, who suspected no evil, went in and told him about thegood little man who had given him the spear wherewith he had slainthe boar.
The elder brother kept him there until the evening, and then theywent away together, and when in the darkness they came to abridge over a brook, the elder brother let the other go first, andwhen he was half-way across he gave him such a blow from behindthat he fell down dead.  He buried him beneath the bridge, tookthe boar, and carried it to the king, pretending that he hadkilled it, whereupon he obtained the king's daughter in marriage.And when his younger brother did not come back he said, the boarmust have ripped up his body, and every one believed it.But as nothing remains hidden from God, so this black deed alsowas to come to light.
Years afterwards a shepherd was driving his herd across thebridge, and saw lying in the sand beneath, a snow-white littlebone.  He thought that it would make a good mouth-piece, sohe clambered down, picked it up, and cut out of it a mouth-piecefor his horn,  but when he blew through it for the first time,to his great astonishment, the bone began of its own accord tosing -     ah, friend thou blowest upon my bone.     Long have I lain beside the water,     my brother slew me for the boar,     and took for his wife the king's young daughter.
What a wonderful horn, said the shepherd, it sings by itself,I must take it to my lord the king.  And when he came with it tothe king the horn again began to sing its little song.  Theking understood it all, and caused the ground below the bridgeto be dug up, and then the whole skeleton of the murdered mancame to light.  The wicked brother could not deny the deed, andwas sewn up in a sack and drowned.  But the bones of the murderedman were laid to rest in a beautiful tomb in the churchyard.There was once a poor woman who gave birth to a little son,and as he came into the world with a caul on, it was predictedthat in his fourteenth year he would have the king's daughterfor his wife.  It happened that soon afterwards the kingcame into the village, and no one knew that he was the king,and when he asked the people what news there was, they answered,a child has just been born with a caul on, whatever anyone soborn undertakes turns out well.  It is prophesied, too, thatin his fourteenth year he will have the king's daughter for hiswife.
The king, who had a bad heart, and was angry about the prophecy,went to the parents, and, seeming quite friendly, said, you poorpeople, let me have your child, and I will take care of it.  Atfirst they refused, but when the stranger offered them a largeamount of gold for it, and they thought, it is a child of goodfortune, and everything must turn out well for it, they at lastconsented, and gave him the child.
The king put it in a box and rode away with it until he came toa deep piece of water, then he threw the box into it and thought,I have freed my daughter from her undesired suitor.
The box, however, did not sink, but floated like a boat, and nota drop of water made its way into it.  And it floated to withintwo miles of the king's chief city, where there was a mill, andit came to a halt at the mill-dam.  A miller's boy, who by goodluck was standing there, noticed it and pulled it out with a hook,thinking that he had found a great treasure, but when he openedit there lay a pretty boy inside, quite fresh and lively.  Hetook him to the miller and his wife, and as they had no childrenthey were glad, and said, "God has given him to us."  They tookgreat care of the foundling, and he grew up in all goodness.
It happened that once in a storm, the king went into the mill, andasked the mill-folk if the tall youth were their son.  No,answered they, he's a foundling.  Fourteen years ago he floateddown to the mill-dam in a box, and the mill-boy pulled him outof the water.
Then the king knew that it was none other than the child ofgood fortune which he had thrown into the water, and he said,my good people, could not the youth take a letter to the queen.I will give him two gold pieces as a reward.  Just as the kingcommands, answered they, and they told the boy to hold himselfin readiness.  Then the king wrote a letter to the queen, whereinhe said, as soon as the boy arrives with this letter, let him bekilled and buried, and all must be done before I come home.The boy set out with this letter, but he lost his way, and in theevening came to a large forest.  In the darkness he saw a smalllight, he went towards it and reached a cottage.  When he went in,an old woman was sitting by the fire quite alone.  She startedwhen she saw the boy, and said, whence do you come, and whitherare you going.  I come from the mill, he answered, and wishto go to the queen, to whom I am taking a letter, but as I havelost my way in the forest I should like to stay here over night.You poor boy, said the woman, you have come into a den of thieves,and when they come home they will kill you.  Let them come,said the boy, I am not afraid, but I am so tired that I cannot goany farther.  And he stretched himself upon a bench and fellasleep.
Soon afterwards the robbers came, and angrily asked what strangeboy was lying there.  Ah, said the old woman, it is an innocentchild who has lost himself in the forest, and out of pity I havelet him come in, he has to take a letter to the queen.  The robbersopened the letter and read it, and in it was written that theboy as soon as he arrived should be put to death.  Then thehardhearted robbers felt pity, and their leader tore up the letterand wrote another, saying, that as soon as the boy came, he shouldbe married at once to the king's daughter.  Then they let him liequietly on the bench until the next morning, and when he awokethey gave him the letter, and showed him the right way.
And the queen, when she had received the letter and read it,did as was written in it, and had a splendid wedding-feastprepared, and the king's daughter was married to the child ofgood fortune, and as the youth was handsome and friendly she livedwith him in joy and contentment.
After some time the king returned to his palace and saw thatthe prophecy was fulfilled, and the child married to his daughter.How has that come to pass, said he, I gave quite another orderin my letter.
So the queen gave him the letter, and said that he might see forhimself what was written in it.  The king read the letter andsaw quite well that it had been exchanged for the other.  Heasked the youth what had become of the letter entrusted to him,and why he had brought another instead of it.  I know nothingabout it, answered he, it must have been changed in the night,when I slept in the forest.  The king said in a passion, you shallnot have everything quite so much your own way, whosoever marriesmy daughter must fetch me from hell three golden hairs fromthe head of the devil, bring me what I want, and you shall keepmy daughter.  In this way the king hoped to be rid of him for ever.But the child of good fortune answered, I will fetch the goldenhairs, I am not afraid of the devil.  Whereupon he took leave ofthem and began his journey.
The road led him to a large town, where the watchman by the gatesasked him what his trade was, and what he knew.  I knoweverything, answered the child of good fortune.  Then you can do usa favor, said the watchman, if you will tell us why our marketfountain, which once flowed with wine has become dry, and nolonger gives even water.  That you shall know, answered he, onlywait until I come back.
Then he went farther and came to another town, and there also thegatekeeper asked him what was his trade, and what he knew.I know everything, answered he.  Then you can do us a favor andtell us why a tree in our town which once bore golden apples nowdoes not even put forth leaves.  You shall know that, answered he,only wait until I come back.
Then he went on and came to a wide river over which he must cross.The ferryman asked him what his trade was, and what he knew.  Iknow everything, answered he.  Then you can do me a favor, saidthe ferryman, and tell me why I must always be rowing backwardsand forwards, and am never set free.  You shall know that,answered he, only wait until I come back.
When he had crossed the water he found the entrance to hell.  Itwas black and sooty within, and the devil was not at home, buthis grandmother was sitting in a large arm-chair.  What do youwant, said she to him, but she did not look so very wicked.  Ishould like to have three golden hairs from the devil's head,answered he, else I cannot keep my wife.  That is a good dealto ask for, said she, if the devil comes home and finds you, itwill cost you your life, but as I pity you, I will see if I cannothelp you.
She changed him into an ant and said, creep into the folds of mydress, you will be safe there.  Yes, answered he, so far, so good,but there are three things besides that I want to know - why afountain which once flowed with wine has become dry, and nolonger gives even water, why a tree which once bore golden applesdoes not even put forth leaves, and why a ferryman must always begoing backwards and forwards, and is never set free.Those are difficult questions, answered she, but just be silentand quiet and pay attention to what the devil says when I pull outthe three golden hairs.
As the evening came on, the devil returned home.  No sooner had heentered than he noticed that the air was not pure.  I smell man'sflesh, said he, all is not right here.  Then he pried intoevery corner, and searched, but could not find anything.  Hisgrandmother scolded him.  It has just been swept, said she, andeverything put in order, and now you are upsetting it again, youhave always got man's flesh in your nose.  Sit down and eat yoursupper.
When he had eaten and drunk he was tired, and laid his head inhis grandmother's lap, and told her she should louse him a little.It was not long before he was fast asleep, snoring and breathingheavily.  Then the old woman took hold of a golden hair, pulledit out, and laid it down beside her.  Oh, cried the devil,what are you doing.  I have had a bad dream, answered thegrandmother, so I seized hold of your hair.  What did you dreamthen, said the devil.  I dreamt that a fountain in a market-placefrom which wine once flowed was dried up, and not even waterwould flow out of it - what is the cause of it.  Oh, ho, if theydid but know it, answered the devil, there is a toad sittingunder a stone in the well - if they killed it, the wine would flowagain.
The grandmother loused him again until he went to sleep andsnored so that the windows shook.  Then she pulled the second hairout.  Ha, what are you doing, cried the devil angrily.  Do nottake it ill, said she, I did it in a dream.  What have you dreamtthis time, asked he.  I dreamt that in a certain kingdom therestood an apple-tree which had once borne golden apples, but nowwould not even bear leaves.  What, think you, was the reason.Oh, if they did but know, answered the devil.  A mouse isgnawing at the root - if they killed it they would have goldenapples again, but if it gnaws much longer the tree will witheraltogether.  But I have had enough of your dreams, if you disturbme in my sleep again you will get a box on the ear.
The grandmother spoke gently to him and picked his lice oncemore until he fell asleep and snored.  Then she took hold of thethird golden hair and pulled it out.  The devil jumped up,roared out, and would have treated her ill if she had notquieted him again and said, who can help bad dreams.  Whatwas the dream, then, asked he, and was quite curious.  I dreamtof a ferryman who complained that he must always ferry fromone side to the other, and was never released.  What is thecause of it.  Ah, the fool, answered the devil, when anyonecomes and wants to go across he must put the oar in his hand,and the other man will haveto ferry and he will be free.  As the grandmother had pluckedout the three golden hairs, and the three questions wereanswered, she let the old devil alone, and he slept untildaybreak.
When the devil had gone out again the old woman took the antout of the folds of her dress, and gave the child of goodfortune his human shape again.  There are the three goldenhairs for you, said she.  What the devil said to your threequestions, I suppose you heard.  Yes, answered he, I heard, andwill take care to remember.  You have what you want, said she,and now you can go your way.  He thanked the old woman forhelping him in his need, and left hell well content thateverything had turned out so fortunately.
When he came to the ferryman he was expected to give thepromised answer.  Ferry me across first, said the child of goodfortune, and then I will tell you how you can be set free, andwhen he reached the opposite shore he gave him the devil's advice.Next time anyone comes, who wants to be ferried over, just put theoar in his hand.
He went on and came to the town wherein stood the unfruitfultree, and there too the watchman wanted an answer.  So hetold him what he had heard from the devil.  Kill the mousewhich is gnawing at its root, and it will again bear goldenapples.  Then the watchman thanked him, and gave him as a rewardtwo asses laden with gold, which followed him.
Finally, he came to the town whose well was dry.  He told thewatchman what the devil had said, a toad is in the well beneatha stone, you must find it and kill it, and the well will againgive wine in plenty.  The watchman thanked him, and alsogave him two asses laden with gold.
At last the child of good fortune got home to his wife, whowas heartily glad to see him again, and to hear how well he hadprospered in everything.  To the king he took what he had askedfor, the devil's three golden hairs, and when the king saw thefour asses laden with gold he was quite content, and said, nowall the conditions are fulfilled, and you can keep my daughter.
But tellme, dear son-in-law, where did all that gold come from - thisis tremendous wealth.  I was rowed across a river, answered he,and got it there, it lies on the shore instead of sand.  Can Itoo fetch some of it, said the king, and he was quite eagerabout it.  As much as you like, answered he.  There is aferryman on the river, let him ferry you over, and you can fillyour sacks on the other side.  The greedy king set out in allhaste, and when he came to the river he beckoned to the ferrymanto put him across.  The ferryman came and bade him get in,and when they got to the other shore he put the oar in hishand and sprang over.  But from this time forth the king had toferry, as a punishment for his sins.  Perhaps he is ferryingstill.  If he is, it is because no one has taken the oar fromhim.A certain miller had little by little fallen into poverty, andhad nothing left but his mill and a large apple-tree behindit.  Once when he had gone into the forest to fetch wood, anold man stepped up to him whom he had never seen before, andsaid, why do you plague yourself with cutting wood, I willmake you rich, if you will promise me what is standing behindyour mill.  What can that be but my apple-tree, thought themiller, and said, yes, and gave a written promise to thestranger.  He, however, laughed mockingly and said, when threeyears have passed, I will come and carry away what belongs to me,and then he went.  When the miller got home, his wife came tomeet him and said, tell me, miller, from whence comes thissudden wealth into our house.  All at once every box and chestwas filled, no one brought it in, and I know not how ithappened.  He answered, it comes from a stranger who met me inthe forest, and promised me great treasure.  I' in return,have promised him what stands behind the mill - we can verywell give him the big apple-tree for it.  Ah, husband, said theterrified wife, that must have been the devil.  He did not mean theapple-tree, but our daughter, who was standing behind the millsweeping the yard.
The miller's daughter was a beautiful, pious girl, and livedthrough the three years in the fear of God and without sin.  Whentherefore the time was over, and the day came when the evil onewas to fetch her, she washed herself clean, and made a circleround herself with chalk.  The devil appeared quite early, buthe could not come near to her.  Angrily, he said to the miller,take all water away from her, that she may no longer be able towash herself, for otherwise I have no power over her.  Themiller was afraid, and did so.  The next morning the devil cameagain, but she had wept on her hands, and they were quiteclean.  Again he could not get near her, and furiously said tothe miller, cut her hands off, or else I have no power overher.  The miller was shocked and answered, how could I cut off myown child's hands.  Then the evil one threatened him and said,if you do not do it you are mine, and I will take you yourself.
The father became alarmed, and promised to obey him.  So hewent to the girl and said, my child, if I do not cut off bothyour hands, the devil will carry me away, and in my terrorI have promised to do it.  Help me in my need, and forgive methe harm I do you.  She replied, dear father, do with me whatyou will, I am your child.  Thereupon she laid down both herhands, and let them be cut off.  The devil came for the thirdtime, but she had wept so long and so much on the stumps, thatafter all they were quite clean.  Then he had to give in, andhad lost all right over her.
The miller said to her, I have by means of you received suchgreat wealth that I will keep you most handsomely as long asyou live.  But she replied, here I cannot stay, I will go forth,compassionate people will give me as much as I require.
Thereupon she caused her maimed arms to be bound to her back,and by sunrise she set out on her way, and walked the whole dayuntil night fell.  Then she came to a royal garden, and bythe shimmering of the moon she saw that trees covered withbeautiful fruits grew init, but she could not enter, for it was surrounded by water.And as she had walked the whole day and not eaten one mouthful,and hunger tormented her, she thought, ah, if I were but inside,that I might eat of the fruit, else must I die of hunger.  Thenshe knelt down, called on God the Lord, and prayed.  Andsuddenly an angel came towards her, who made a dam in the water,so that the moat became dry and she could walk through it.  Andnow she went into the garden and the angel went with her.  Shesaw a tree covered with beautiful pears, but they were allcounted.  Then she went to them, and to still her hunger, ateone with her mouth from the tree, but no more.  The gardenerwas watching, but as the angel was standing by, he was afraidand thought the maiden was a spirit, and was silent, neitherdid he dare to cry out, or to speak to the spirit.  When she hadeaten the pear, she was satisfied, and went and concealed herselfamong the bushes.  The king to whom the garden belonged, camedown to it next morning, and counted, and saw that one of thepears was missing, and asked the gardener what had become of it,as it was not lying beneath the tree, but was gone.  Thenanswered the gardener, last night, a spirit came in, who had nohands, and ate off one of the pears with its mouth.  The kingsaid, how did the spirit get over the water, and where did it goafter it had eaten the pear.  The gardener answered, someonecame in a snow-white garment from heaven who made a dam, andkept back the water, that the spirit might walk through the moat.And as it must have been an angel, I was afraid, and askedno questions, and did not cry out.  When the spirit had eatenthe pear, it went back again.  The king said, if it be as yousay, I will watch with you to-night.
When it grew dark the king came into the garden and broughta priest with him, who was to speak to the spirit.  All threeseated themselves beneath the tree and watched.  At midnight themaiden came creeping out of the thicket, went to the tree, andagain ate one pear off it with her mouth, and beside her stoodthe angel in white garments.  Then the priest went out to themand said, "Do you come from heaven or from earth?  Are you aspirit, or a humanbeing?"  She replied, "I am no spirit, but an unhappy mortaldeserted by all but God."  The king said, "If you are forsakenby all the world, yet will I not forsake you."  He took her withhim into his royal palace, and as she was so beautiful and good,he loved her with all his heart, had silver hands made for her,and took her to wife.
After a year the king had to go on a journey, so he commendedhis young queen to the care of his mother and said, if sheis brought to child-bed take care of her, nurse her well,and tell me of it at once in a letter.  Then she gave birth toa fine boy.  So the old mother made haste to write and announcethe joyful news to him.  But the messenger rested by a brookon the way, and as he was fatigued by the great distance, hefell asleep.  Then came the devil, who was always seeking toinjure the good queen, and exchanged the letter for another, inwhich was written that the queen had brought a monster intothe world.  When the king read the letter he was shocked andmuch troubled, but he wrote in answer that they were to takegreat care of the queen and nurse her well until his arrival.
The messenger went back with the letter, but rested at thesame place and again fell asleep.  Then came the devilonce more, and put a different letter in his pocket, in whichit was written that they were to put the queen and her child todeath.  The old mother was terribly shocked when she receivedthe letter, and could not believe it.  She wrote back again tothe king, but received no other answer, because each time thedevil substituted a false letter, and in the last letter it wasalso written that she was to preserve the queen's tongue andeyes as a token that she had obeyed.
But the old mother wept to think such innocent blood was tobe shed, and had a hind brought by night and cut out her tongueand eyes, and kept them.  Then said she to the queen, "I cannothave you killed as the king commands, but here you may stayno longer.  Go forth into the wide world with your child, andnever come here again."  The poor woman tied her child on her back,and went away with eyes full of tears.  She came into a great wildforest, and then she fell on her knees and prayed to God, and theangel of the Lord appeared to her and led her to a little houseon which was a sign with the words, here all dwell free.  Asnow-white maiden came out of the little house and said, welcome,lady queen, and conducted her inside.  Then she unbound thelittle boy from her back, and held him to her breast that he mightfeed, and laid him in a beautifully-made little bed.  Thensaid the poor woman, "From whence do you know that I was a queen?"
The white maiden answered, "I am an angel sent by God, to watchover you and your child."  The queen stayed seven years in thelittle house, and was well cared for, and by God's grace, becauseof her piety, her hands which had been cut off, grew once more.
At last the king came home again from his journey, and his firstwish was to see his wife and the child.  Then his aged motherbegan to weep and said, "You wicked man, why did you write to methat I was to take those two innocent lives," and she showed himthe two letters which the evil one had forged, and thencontinued, "I did as you bade me, and she showed the tokens, thetongue and eyes."  Then the king began to weep for his poor wifeand his little son so much more bitterly than she was doing,that the aged mother had compassion on him and said, "be at peace,she still lives, I secretly caused a hind to be killed, andtook these tokens from it, but I bound the child to your wife'sback and bade her go forth into the wide world, and made herpromise never to come back here again, because you were soangry with her."  Then spoke the king, "I will go as far asthe sky is blue, and will neither eat nor drink until I havefound again my dear wife and my child, if in the meantime theyhave not been killed, or died of hunger."
Thereupon the king traveled about for seven long years, andsought her in every cleft of the rocks and in every cave, buthe found her not, and thought she had died of want.  During thewhole time he neither ate nor drank, but God supported him.  Atlength he came into a great forest, and found therein the littlehouse whose sign was, here all dwell free.  Then forth camethe white maiden, took him by the hand, led him in, and said,"Welcome, lord king," and asked him from whence he came.  Heanswered, "Soon shall I have traveled about for the space ofseven years, and I seek my wife and her child, but cannot findthem."  The angel offered him meat and drink, but he did nottake anything, and only wished to rest a little.  Then he laydown to sleep, and laid a handkerchief over his face.
Thereupon the angel went into the chamber where the queensat with her son, whom she usually called Sorrowful, andsaid to her, go out with your child, your husband has come.  Soshe went to the place where he lay, and the handkerchieffell from his face.  Then said she, "Sorrowful, pick up yourfather's handkerchief, and cover his face again."  The child pickedit up, and put it over his face again.  The king in his sleepheard what passed, and had pleasure in letting the handkerchieffall once more.  But the child grew impatient, and said,"Dear mother, how can I cover my father's face when I have nofather in this world.  I have learnt to say the prayer - OurFather, which art in heaven - you have told me that my fatherwas in heaven, and was the good God, and how can I know a wildman like this.  He is not my father."  When the king heard that,he got up, and asked who they were.  Then saidshe, "I am your wife, and that is your son, Sorrowful".  And hesaw her living hands, and said, "My wife had silver hands."  Sheanswered, "The good God has caused my natural hands to grow again,"and the angel went into the inner room, and brought the silverhands, and showed them to him.  Hereupon he knew for a certaintythat it was his dear wife and his dear child, and he kissedthem, and was glad, and said, "A heavy stone has fallen from offmy heart."  Then the angel of God ate with them once again, andafter that they went home to the king's aged mother.  There weregreat rejoicings everywhere, and the king and queen were marriedagain, and lived contentedly to their happy end.The mother of Hans said, whither away, Hans.  Hans answered, toGretel.  Behave well, Hans.  Oh, I'll behave well.  Good-bye,mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hans comes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.Good day, Hans.  What do you bring that is good.  I bring nothing,I want to have something given me.  Gretel presents Hans with aneedle.  Hans says, good-bye, Gretel.  Good-bye, Hans.Hans takes the needle, sticks it into a hay-cart, and follows thecart home.  Good evening, mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where haveyou been.  With Gretel.  What did you take her.  Took her nothing,had something given me.  What did Gretel give you.  Gave me aneedle.  Where is the needle, Hans.  Stuck it in the hay-cart.That was ill done, Hans.  You should have stuck the needle inyour sleeve.  Never mind, I'll do better next time.
Whither away, Hans.  To Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.Oh, I'll behave well.  Good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hanscomes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What do youbring that is good.  I bring nothing, I want to have somethinggiven to me.  Gretel presents Hans with a knife.  Good-bye, Gretel.Good-bye Hans.  Hans takes the knife, sticks it in his sleeve, andgoes home.  Good evening, mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Wherehave you been.  With Gretel.  What did you take her.  Took hernothing, she gave me something.  What did Gretel give you.  Gaveme a knife.  Where is the knife, Hans.  Stuck in my sleeve.That's ill done, Hans, you should have put the knife in yourpocket.  Never mind, will do better next time.
Whither away, Hans.  To Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.Oh, I'll behave well.  Good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hanscomes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What goodthing do you bring.  I bring nothing, I want something given me.Gretel presents Hans with a young goat.  Good-bye, Gretel.Good-bye, Hans.  Hans takes the goat, ties its legs, and puts itin his pocket.  When he gets home it is suffocated.  Good evening,mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where have you been.  With Gretel.What did you take her.  Took nothing, she gave me something.  Whatdid Gretel give you.  She gave me a goat.  Where is the goat, Hans.Put it in my pocket.  That was ill done, Hans, you should haveput a rope round the goat's neck.  Never mind, will do better nexttime.
Whither away, Hans,  to Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.Oh, I'll behave well good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hanscomes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What goodthing do you bring.  I bring nothing, I want something given tome.  Gretel presents Hans with a piece of bacon.  Good-bye,Gretel.  Good-bye, Hans.Hans takes the bacon, ties it to a rope, and drags it awaybehind him.  The dogs come and devour the bacon.  When he getshome, he has the rope in his hand, and there is no longeranything hanging to it.  Good evening, mother.  Good evening,Hans.  Where have you been.  With Gretel.  What did you takeher.  I took her nothing, she gave me something.  What didGretel give you.Gave me a bit of bacon.  Where is the bacon, Hans.  I tied it toa rope, brought it home, dogs took it.  That was ill done, Hans,you should have carried the bacon on your head.  Never mind, willdo better next time.
Whither away, Hans.  To Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.I'll behave well.  Good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.  Hanscomes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  What goodthing do you bring.  I bring nothing, but would have somethinggiven.  Gretel presents Hans with a calf.  Good-bye, Gretel.Good-bye, Hans.Hans takes the calf, puts it on his head, and the calf kicks hisface.  Good evening, mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where have youbeen.  With Gretel.  What did you take her.  I took nothing, buthad something given me.  What did Gretel give you.  A calf.Where have you the calf, Hans.  I set it on my head and itkicked my face.  That was ill done, Hans, you should have ledthe calf, and put it in the stall.  Never mind, will do betternext time.
Whither away, Hans.  To Gretel, mother.  Behave well, Hans.I'll behave well.  Good-bye, mother.  Good-bye, Hans.Hans comes to Gretel.  Good day, Gretel.  Good day, Hans.  Whatgood thing do you bring.  I bring nothing, but would havesomething given.  Gretel says to Hans, I will go with you.Hans takes Gretel, ties her to a rope, leads her to the rack andbinds her fast.  Then Hans goes to his mother.  Good evening,mother.  Good evening, Hans.  Where have you been.  With Gretel.What did you take her.  I took her nothing.  What did Gretelgive you.  She gave me nothing, she came with me.  Where haveyou left Gretel.  I led her by the rope, tied her to the rack,and scattered some grass for her.  That was ill done, Hans, youshould have cast friendly eyes on her.  Never mind, will do better.
Hans went into the stable, cut out all the calves, and sheep's eyes,and threw them in Gretel's face.  Then Gretel became angry, toreherself loose and ran away, and was no longer the bride of Hans.An aged count once lived in switzerland, who had an only son,but he was stupid, and could learn nothing.  Then said thefather, hark you, my son, try as I will I can get nothing intoyour head.  You must go from hence, I will give you into thecare of a celebrated master, who shall see what he can dowith you.  The youth was sent into a strange town, and remained awhole year with the master.  At the end of this time, he camehome again, and his father asked, now, my son, what have youlearnt.  Father, I have learnt what the dogs say when they bark.
Lord have mercy on us, cried the father, is that all you havelearnt.  I will send you into another town, to another master.The youth was taken thither, and stayed a year with this masterlikewise.  When he came back the father again asked, my son,what have you learnt.  He answered, father, I have learnt whatthe birds say.  Then the father fell into a rage and said, oh,you lost man, you have spent the precious time and learnt nothing,are you not ashamed to appear before my eyes.  I will send youto a third master, but if you learn nothing this time also,I will no longer be your father.  The youth remained a whole yearwith the third master also, and when he came home again, andhis father inquired, my son, what have you learnt.  Heanswered, dear father, I have this year learnt what the frogscroak.  Then the father fell into the most furious anger, sprangup, called his people thither, and said, this man is no longermy son, I drive him forth, and command you to take him out intothe forest, and kill him.  They took him forth, but when theyshould have killed him, they could not do it for pity, andlet him go, and they cut the eyes and the tongue out of a deerthat they might carry them to the old man as a token.
The youth wandered on, and after some time came to a fortresswhere he begged for a night's lodging.  Yes, said the lord ofthe castle, if you will pass the night down there in the oldtower, go thither, but I warn you, it is at the peril of yourlife, for it is full of wild dogs, which bark and howl withoutstopping, and at certain hours a man has to be given to them,whom they at once devour.  The whole district was in sorrowand dismay because of them, and yet no one could do anythingto stop this.  The youth, however, was without fear, and said,just let me go down to the barking dogs, and give me somethingthat I can throw to them, they will do nothing to harm me.
As he himself would have it so, they gave him some food forthe wild animals, and led him down to the tower.  When he wentinside, the dogs did not bark at him, but wagged their tailsquite amicably around him, ate what he set before them, and didnot hurt one hair of his head.  Next morning, to the astonishmentof everyone, he came out again safe and unharmed, and saidto the lord of the castle, the dogs have revealed to me, intheir own language, why they dwell there, and bring evil onthe land.  They are bewitched, and are obliged to watch over agreat treasure which is below in the tower, and they canhave no rest until it is taken away, and I have likewise learnt,from their discourse, how that is to be done.  Then all whoheard this rejoiced, and the lord of the castle said he wouldadopt him as a son if he accomplished it successfully.  Hewent down again, and as he knew what he had to do, he did itthoroughly, and brought a chest full of gold out with him.
The howling of the wild dogs was henceforth heard no more, theyhad disappeared, and the country was freed from the trouble.After some time he took it into his head that he would travel toRome. On the way he passed by a marsh, in which a number offrogs were sitting croaking.  He listened to them, and when hebecame aware of what they were saying, he grew very thoughtfuland sad.  At last he arrived in Rome, where the Pope had just died,and there was great doubt among the cardinals as to whom theyshould appoint as his successor.  They at length agreed thatthe person should be chosen as Pope who should be distinguishedby some divine and miraculous token.  And just as that was decidedon, the young count entered into the church, and suddenly twosnow-white doves flew on his shoulders and remained sittingthere.  The ecclesiastics recognized therein the token from above,and asked him on the spot if he would be Pope.  He was undecided,and knew not if he were worthy of this, but the doves counselledhim to do it, and at length he said yes.  Then was he anointed andconsecrated, and thus was fulfilled what he had heard from thefrogs on his way, which had so affected him, that he was to behis holiness the Pope.  Then he had to sing a mass, and did notknow one word of it, but the two doves sat continually on hisshoulders, and said it all in his ear.There was once a man who had a daughter who was called cleverelsie.  And when she had grown up her father said, we will gether married.  Yes, said the mother, if only someone would come whowould have her.  At length a man came from a distance and wooedher, who was called Hans, but he stipulated that clever elsieshould be really smart.  Oh, said the father, she has plenty ofgood sense.  And the mother said, oh, she can see the wind comingup the street, and hear the flies coughing.
Well, said Hans, if she is not really smart, I won't have her.When they were sitting at dinner and had eaten, the mother said,elsie, go into the cellar and fetch some beer.  Then clever elsietook the pitcher from the wall, went into the cellar, and tappedthe lid briskly as she went, so that the time might not appearlong.  When she was below she fetched herself a chair, and setit before the barrel so that she had no need to stoop, and didnot hurt her back or do herself any unexpected injury.  Then sheplaced the can before her, and turned the tap, and while thebeer was running she would not let her eyes be idle, but lookedup at the wall, and after much peering here and there, saw apick-axe exactly above her, which the masons had accidentallyleft there.
Then clever elsie began to weep, and said, if I get Hans, and wehave a child, and he grows big, and we send him into the cellarhere to draw beer, then the pick-axe will fall on his head andkill him.  Then she sat and wept and screamed with all the strengthof her body, over the misfortune which lay before her.  Thoseupstairs waited for the drink, but clever elsie still did notcome.  Then the woman said to the servant, just go down into thecellar and see where elsie is.  The maid went and found hersitting in front of the barrel, screaming loudly.  Elsie, why doyou weep, asked the maid.  Ah, she answered, have I not reasonto weep.  If I get Hans, and we have a child, and he grows big,and has to draw beer here, the pick-axe will perhaps fall on hishead, and kill him.  Then said the maid, what a clever elsie wehave.  And sat down beside her and began loudly to weep over themisfortune.  After a while, as the maid did not come back, thoseupstairs were thirsty for the beer, the man said to the boy, justgo down into the cellar and see where elsie and the girl are.
The boy went down, and there sat clever elsie and the girl bothweeping together.  Then he asked, why are you weeping,  ah, saidelsie, have I not reason to weep.  If I get Hans, and we have achild, and he grows big, and has to draw beer here, the pick-axewill fall on his head and kill him.  Then said the boy, what aclever elsie we have.  And sat down by her, and likewise beganto howl loudly.  Upstairs theywaited for the boy, but as he still did not return, the man saidto the woman, just go down into the cellar and see where elsie is.
The woman went down, and found all three in the midst of theirlamentations, and inquired what was the cause, then elsie toldher also that her future child was to be killed by the pick-axe,when it grew big and had to draw beer, and the pick-axe felldown.  Then said the mother likewise, what a clever elsie we have.And sat down and wept with them.  The man upstairs waited a shorttime, but as his wife did not come back and his thirst grew evergreater, he said, I must go into the cellar myself and see whereelsie is.  But when he got into the cellar, and they were allsitting together crying, and he heard the reason, and that elsie'schild was the cause, and that elsie might perhaps bring one intothe world some day, and that he might be killed by thepick-axe, if he should happen to be sitting beneath it, drawingbeer just at the very time when it fell down, he cried, oh,what a clever elsie.  And sat down, and likewise wept with them.
The bridegroom stayed upstairs alone for a long time, then asno one would come back he thought, they must be waiting for mebelow, I too must go there and see what they are about.  When hegot down, the five of them were sitting screaming and lamentingquite piteously, each out-doing the other.  What misfortune hashappened then, he asked.  Ah, dear Hans, said elsie, if we marryeach other and have a child, and he is big, and we perhaps sendhim here to draw something to drink, then the pick-axe which hasbeen left up there might dash his brains out if it were to falldown, so have we not reason to weep.  Come, said Hans, moreunderstanding than that is not needed for my household, as youare such a clever elsie, I will have you.  And he seized herhand, took her upstairs with him, and married her.
After Hans had had her some time, he said, wife, I am goingout to work and earn some money for us, go into the field and cutthe corn that we may have some bread.  Yes, dear Hans, I will dothat.  After Hans had gone away, she cooked herself some goodbroth and took it into the field with her.  When she came to thefield she said to herself, what shall I do, shall I cut first, orshall I eat first.  Oh, I will eat first.  Then she drank her cupof broth, and when she was fully satisfied, she once more said,what shall I do.  Shall I cut first, or shall I sleep first.  Iwill sleep first.  Then she lay down among the corn and fellasleep.  Hans had been at home for a long time, but elsie did notcome, then said he, what a clever elsie I have, she is soindustrious that she does not even come home to eat.  But whenevening came and she still stayed away, Hans went out to see whatshe had cut, but nothing was cut, and she was lying among thecorn asleep.  Then Hans hastened home and brought a fowler's netwith little bells and hung it round about her, and she stillwent on sleeping.  Then he ran home, shut the house-door, and satdown in his chair and worked.  At length, when it was quite dark,clever elsie awoke and when she got up there was a jingling allround about her, and the bells rang at each step which she took.Then she was alarmed, and became uncertain whether she really wasclever elsie or not, and said, is it I, or is it not I.  But sheknew not what answer to make to this, and stood for a time indoubt, at length she thought, I will go home and ask if it be I,or if it be not I, they will be sure to know.  She ran to the doorof her own house, but it was shut, then she knocked at thewindow and cried, Hans, is elsie within.  Yes, answered Hans, sheis within.  Hereupon she was terrified, and said, ah, heavens.Then it is not I.  And went to another door, but when the peopleheard the jingling of the bells they would not open it, and shecould get in nowhere.  Then she ran out of the village, and noone has seen her since.There was once upon a time a tailor who had three sons, andonly one goat.  But as the goat supported all of them withher milk, she was obliged to have good food, and to be takenevery day to pasture.  The sons did this, in turn.  Once the eldesttook her to the churchyard, where the finest herbs were to be found,and let her eat and run about there.  At night when it was time togo home he asked, goat, have you had enough.  The goat answered     I have eaten so much,     not a leaf more I'll touch, meh. Meh.
Come home, then, said the youth, and took hold of the cordround her neck, led her into the stable and tied her up securely.Well, said the old tailor, has the goat had as much food as sheought.  Oh, answered the son, she has eaten so much, not aleaf more she'll touch.  But the father wished to satisfy himself,and went down to the stable, stroked the dear animal and asked,goat, are you satisfied.  The goat answered,     how should I be satisfied.     Among the ditches I leapt about,     found no leaf, so went without, meh. Meh.
What do I hear, cried the tailor, and ran upstairs and said to theyouth.  HI, you liar, you said the goat had had enough, and havelet her hunger, and in his anger he took the yard-measure fromthe wall, and drove him out with blows.
Next day it was the turn of the second son, who sought a placein the fence of the garden, where nothing but good herbs grew, andthe goat gobbled them all up.  At night when he wanted to go home,he asked, goat, are you satisfied.  The goat answered,     I have eaten so much,     not a leaf more I'll touch, meh. Meh.
Come home, then, said the youth, and led her home, and tied herup in the stable.  Well, said the old tailor, has the goat had asmuch food as she ought.  Oh, answered the son, she has eatenso much, not a leaf more she'll touch.  The tailor would not relyon this, but went down to the stable and said, goat, have you hadenough.  The goat answered,     how should I be satisfied.     Among the ditches I leapt about,     found no leaf, so went without, meh. Meh.
The godless wretch. Cried the tailor, to let such a good animalhunger, and he ran up and drove the youth out of doors with theyard-measure.
Now came the turn of the third son, who wanted to do his dutywell, and sought out some bushes with the finest leaves, and let thegoat devour them.  In the evening when he wanted to go home, heasked, goat, have you had enough.  The goat answered,     I have eaten so much,     not a leaf more I'll touch, meh. Meh.
Come home, then, said the youth, and led her into the stable, andtied her up.  Well, said the old tailor, has the goat had her fullshare of food.  She has eaten so much, not a leaf more she'lltouch.  The tailor was distrustful, went down and asked, goat,have you had enough.  The wicked beast answered,     how should I be satisfied.     Among the ditches I leapt about,     found no leaf, so went without, meh. Meh.
Oh, the brood of liars, cried the tailor, each as wicked andforgetful of his duty as the other.  You shall no longer make afool of me, and quite beside himself with anger, he ran upstairsand belabored the poor young fellow so vigorously with theyard-measure that he sprang out of the house.
The old tailor was now alone with his goat.  Next morning hewent down into the stable, stroked the goat and said, come, mydear little animal, I myself will take you to feed.  He took herby the rope and conducted her to green hedges, and amongst milfoiland whatever else goats like to eat.  There you may for once eat toyour heart's content, said he to her, and let her browse tillevening.  Then he asked, goat, are you satisfied.  She replied.     I have eaten so much,     not a leaf more I'll touch, meh. Meh.
Come home, then, said the tailor, and led her into the stable, andtied her fast.  When he was going away, he turned round again andsaid, well, are you satisfied for once.  But the goat behaved nobetter to him, and cried,     how should I be satisfied.     Among the ditches I leapt about,     found no leaf, so went without, meh. Meh.
When the tailor heard that, he was shocked, and saw clearly thathe had driven away his three sons without cause.  Wait, youungrateful creature, cried he, it is not enough to drive you forth,I will brand you so that you will no more dare to show yourselfamongst honest tailors.  In great haste he ran upstairs, fetched hisrazor, lathered the goat's head, and shaved her as clean as the palmof his hand.  And as the yard-measure would have been too good forher, he brought the horsewhip, and gave her such cuts with it thatshe bounded away with tremendous leaps.
When the tailor was thus left quite alone in his house he fell intogreat grief, and would gladly have had his sons back again, but noone knew whither they were gone.  The eldest had apprenticedhimself to a joiner, and learnt industriously and indefatigably,and when the time came for him to go traveling, his master presentedhim with a little table which was not particularly beautiful, andwas made of common wood, but which had one good property.  Ifanyone set it out, and said, little table, spread yourself, the goodlittle table was at once covered with a clean little cloth, and aplate was there, and a knife and fork beside it, and dishes withboiled meats and roasted meats, as many as there was room for, and agreat glass of red wine shone so that it made the heart glad.  Theyoung journeyman thought, with this you have enough for yourwhole life, and went joyously about the world and never troubledhimself at all whether an inn was good or bad, or if anything wasto be found in it or not.  When it suited him he did not enter aninn at all, but either on the plain, in a wood, a meadow, orwherever he fancied, he took his little table off his back, set itdown before him, and said, spread yourself, and then everythingappeared that his heart desired.  At length he took it into his headto go back to his father, whose anger would now be appeased, andwho would now willingly receive him with his magic table.  It cameto pass that on his way home, he came one evening to an inn whichwas filled with guests.  They bade him welcome, and invited him tosit and eat with them, for otherwise he would have difficulty ingetting anything.  No, answered the joiner, I will not take the fewmorsels out ofyour mouths.  Rather than that, you shall be my guests.  Theylaughed, and thought he was jesting with them.  He but placed hiswooden table in the middle of the room, and said, little table,spread yourself.  Instantly it was covered with food, so good thatthe host could never have procured it, and the smell of itascended pleasantly to the nostrils of the guests.  Fall to, dearfriends, said the joiner, and the guests when they saw that hemeant it, did not need to be asked twice, but drew near, pulled outtheir knives and attacked it valiantly.  And what surprised them themost was that when a dish became empty, a full one instantly tookits place of its own accord.  The innkeeper stood in one corner andwatched the affair.  He did not at all know what to say, butthought, you could easily find a use for such a cook as that in yourhousehold.  The joiner and his comrades made merry until lateinto the night.  At length they lay down to sleep, and the youngapprentice also went to bed, and set his magic table against thewall.  The host's thoughts, however, let him have no rest.  Itoccurred to him that there was a little old table in his lumber-roomwhich looked just like the apprentice's and he brought it out,and carefully exchanged it for the wishing table.  Next morningthe joiner paid for his bed, took up his table, never thinkingthat he had got a false one, and went his way.  At mid-day hereached his father, who received him with great joy.  Well, my dearson, what have you learnt.  Said he to him.  Father, I have becomea joiner.
A good trade, replied the old man, but what have you broughtback with you from your apprenticeship.  Father, the best thingwhich I have brought back with me is this little table.  Thetailor inspected it on all sides and said, you did not make amasterpiece when you made that.  It is a bad old table.  But itis a table which furnishes itself, replied the son.  When I set itout, and tell it to spread itself, the most beautiful dishes standon it, and a wine also, which gladdens the heart.  Just invite allour relations and friends, they shall refresh and enjoy themselvesfor once, for the table will give them all they require.  When thecompany was assembled, he put his table in the middle of the room andsaid, little table,spread yourself, but the little table did not bestir itself, andremained just as bare as any other table which does not understandlanguage.  Then the poor apprentice became aware that his tablehad been changed, and was ashamed at having to stand there like aliar.  The relations, however, mocked him, and were forced to gohome without having eaten or drunk.  The father brought out hispatches again, and went on tailoring, but the son went to amaster in the craft.
The second son had gone to a miller and had apprenticed himselfto him.  When his years were over, the master said, as youhave conducted yourself so well, I give you an ass of a peculiarkind, which neither draws a cart nor carries a sack.  What good ishe, then. Asked the young apprentice.  He spews forth gold, answeredthe miller.  If you set him on a cloth and say bricklebrit,the good animal will spew forth gold pieces for you from back andfront.  That is a fine thing, said the apprentice, and thanked themaster, and went out into the world.  When he had need of gold,he had only to say bricklebrit to his ass, and it rained goldpieces, and he had nothing to do but pick them off the ground.Wheresoever he went, the best of everything was good enough forhim, and the dearer the better, for he had always a full purse.When he had looked about the world for some time, he thought, youmust seek out your father.  If you go to him with the gold-ass hewill forget his anger, and receive you well.  It came to passthat he came to the same inn in which his brother's table had beenexchanged.  He led his ass by the bridle, and the host was aboutto take the animal from him and tie him up, but the youngapprentice said, don't trouble yourself, I will take my greyhorse into the stable, and tie him up myself too, for I must knowwhere he stands.  This struck the host as odd, and he thoughtthat a man who was forced to look after his ass himself, could nothave much to spend.  But when the stranger put his hand in hispocket and brought out two gold pieces, and said he was toprovide something good for him, the host opened his eyes wide, andran and sought out the best he could muster.  After dinner theguest asked what he owed.  The host didnot see why he should not double the reckoning, and said theapprentice must give two more gold pieces.  He felt in his pocket,but his gold was just at an end.  Wait an instant, sir host, saidhe, I will go and fetch some money.  But he took the table-clothwith him.  The host could not imagine what this could mean, andbeing curious, stole after him, and as the guest bolted the stabledoor, he peeped through a hole left by a knot in the wood.  Thestranger spread out the cloth under the animal and cried,bricklebrit, and immediately the beast began to let gold pieces fallfrom back and front, so that it fairly rained down money on theground.  Eh, my word, said the host, ducats are quickly coinedthere.  A purse like that is not to be sniffed at.  The guestpaid his score, and went to bed, but in the night the host stoledown into the stable, led away the master of the mint, and tied upanother ass in his place.
Early next morning the apprentice traveled away with his ass,and thought that he had his gold-ass.  At mid-day he reached hisfather, who rejoiced to see him again, and gladly took him in.What have you made of yourself, my son.  Asked the old man.A miller, dear father, he answered.  What have you brought backwith you from your travels.  Nothing else but an ass.  There areasses enough here, said the father, I would rather have had a goodgoat.  Yes, replied the son, but it is no common ass, but agold-ass, when I say bricklebrit, the good beast spews forth a wholesheetful of gold pieces.  Just summon all our relations hither,and I will make them rich folks.  That suits me well, said thetailor, for then I shall have no need to torment myself any longerwith the needle, and ran out himself and called the relationstogether.  As soon as they were assembled, the miller bade themmake way, spread out his cloth, and brought the ass into the room.Now watch, said he, and cried, bricklebrit, but what fell were notgold pieces, and it was clear that the animal knew nothing of theart, for every ass does not attain such perfection.  Then the poormiller pulled a long face, saw that he was betrayed, and beggedpardon of the relatives, who went home as poor as they came.  Therewas no help for it, the old man had to betake him to his needle oncemore, and the youth hired himself to a miller.
The third brother had apprenticed himself to a turner, and as thatis skilled labor, he was the longest in learning.  His brothers,however, told him in a letter how badly things had gone with them,and how the innkeeper had cheated them of ther beautifulwishing-gifts on the last evening before they reached home.  Whenthe turner had served his time, and had to set out on his travels,as he had conducted himself so well, his master presented him with asack and said, there is a cudgel in it.  I can put on the sack, saidhe, and it may be of good service to me, but why should the cudgelbe in it.  It only makes it heavy.  I will tell you why, repliedthe master.  If anyone has done anything to injure you, do but say,out of the sack, cudgel. And the cudgel will leap forth among thepeople, and play such a dance on their backs that they will not beable to stir or move for a week, and it will not leave off untilyou say, into the sack, cudgel.  The apprentice thanked him, andput the sack on his back, and when anyone came too near him, andwished to attack him, he said, out of the sack, cudgel, andinstantly the cudgel sprang out, and dusted the coat or jacket ofone after the other on their backs, and never stopped until it hadstripped it off them, and it was done so quickly, that before anyonewas aware, it was already his own turn.  In the evening theyoung turner reached the inn where his brothers had been cheated.
He laid his sack on the table before him, and began to talk of allthe wonderful things which he had seen in the world.  Yes, saidhe, people may easily find a table which will spread itself, agold-ass, and things of that kind - extremely good things whichI by no means despise - but these are nothing in comparison withthe treasure which I have won for myself, and am carrying aboutwith me in my sack there.  The innkeeper pricked up his ears.What in the world can that be.  Thought he.  The sack must be filledwith nothing but jewels.  I ought to get them cheap too, for allgood things go in threes.  When it was time for sleep, the gueststretched himself on the bench, and laid his sack beneath himfor a pillow.  When the innkeeper thought his guestwas lying in a sound sleep, he went to him and pushed and pulledquite gently and carefully at the sack to see if he could possiblydraw it away and lay another in its place.
The turner, however, had been waiting for this for a long time, andnow just as the inn-keeper was about to give a hearty tug, he cried,out of the sack, cudgel.  Instantly the little cudgel came forth,and fell on the inn-keeper and gave him a sound thrashing.The host cried for mercy.  But the louder he cried, the harder thecudgel beat the time on his back, until at length he fell to theground exhausted.  Then the turner said, if you do not give backthe table which spreads itself, and the gold-ass, the dance shallbegin afresh.  Oh, no, cried the host, quite humbly, I will gladlyproduce everything, only make the accursed kobold creep back intothe sack.  Then said the apprentice, I will let mercy take theplace of justice, but beware of getting into mischief again.  So hecried, into the sack, cudgel.  And let him have rest.
Next morning the turner went home to his father with thewishing-table, and the gold-ass.  The tailor rejoiced when he sawhim once more, and asked him likewise what he had learned in foreignparts.  Dear father, said he, I have become a turner.  A skilledtrade, said the father.  What have you brought back with you fromyour travels.
A precious thing, dear father, replied the son, a cudgel in thesack.
What cried the father, a cudgel.  That's certainly worth yourtrouble.  From every tree you can cut yourself one.  But not onelike this, dear father.  If I say, out of the sack, cudgel, thecudgel springs out and leads anyone ill-disposed toward me a wearydance, and never stops until he lies on the ground and prays forfair weather.  Look you, with this cudgel have I rescued thewishing-table and the gold-ass which the thievish innkeeper tookaway from my brothers.  Now let them both be sent for, and inviteall our kinsmen.  I will give them to eat and to drink, and willfill their pockets with gold into the bargain.  The old tailorhad not much confidence.  Nevertheless he summoned the relativestogether.  Then the turner spread a cloth in the room and led in thegold-ass, and said to his brother, now, dear brother, speak to him.The miller said, bricklebrit, and instantly the gold pices raineddown on the cloth like a thunder-shower, and the ass did not stopuntil every one of them had so much that he could carry no more. - I can see by your face that you also would have liked to bethere. -
Then the turner brought the little table, and said, now dearbrother, speak to it.  And scarcely had the carpenter said, table,spread yourself, than it was spread and amply covered with themost exquisite dishes.  Then such a meal took place as the goodtailor had never yet known in his house, and the whole party ofkinsmen stayed together till far in the night, and were all merryand glad.  The tailor locked away needle and thread, yard-measureand goose, in a closet, and lived with his three sons in joy andsplendor.
What, however, happened to the goat who was to blame for thetailor driving out his three sons?  That I will tell you.  Shewas ashamed that she had a bald head, and ran to a fox's hole andcrept into it.  When the fox came home, he was met by two greateyes shining out of the darkness, and was terrified and ran away.A bear met him, and as the fox looked quite disturbed, he said,what is the matter with you, brother fox, why do you look likethat.  Ah, answered redskin, a fierce beast is in my cave and staredat me with its fiery eyes.  We will soon drive him out, saidthe bear, and went with him to the cave and looked in, but whenhe saw the fiery eyes, fear seized on him likewise.  He would havenothing to do with the furious beast, and took to his heels.  Thebee met him, and as she saw that he was ill at ease, she said,bear, you are really pulling a very pitiful face.  What has becomeof all your gaiety.  It is all very well for you to talk, repliedthe bear, a furious beast with staring eyes is in redskin's house,and we can't drive him out.  The bee said, bear I pity you, I ama poor weak creature whom you would not turn aside to look at, butstill, I believe, I can help you.  She flew into the fox's cave,lighted on the goat's smoothly-shorn head, and stung her soviolently, that she sprang up, crying meh, meh, and ran forthinto the world as if mad, and to this hour no one knows where shehas gone.There was once a poor peasant who sat in the evening by thehearth and poked the fire, and his wife sat and spun.  Thensaid he, how sad it is that we have no children.  With us allis so quiet, and in other houses it is noisy and lively.Yes, replied the wife, and sighed, even if we had only one,and it were quite small, and only as big as a thumb, I should bequite satisfied, and we would still love it with all our hearts.Now it so happened that the woman fell ill, and after sevenmonths gave birth to a child, that was perfect in all its limbs,but no longer than a thumb.  Then said they, it is as we wishedit to be, and it shall be our dear child.  And because of itssize, they called it thumbling.  Though they did not let it wantfor food, the child did not grow taller, but remained as it hadbeen at the first.  Nevertheless it looked sensibly out of itseyes, and soon showed itself to be a wise and nimble creature,for everything it did turned out well.
One day the peasant was getting ready to go into the forest tocut wood, when he said as if to himself, how I wish that therewas someone who would bring the cart to me.  Oh father, criedthumbling, I will soon bring the cart, rely on that.  It shallbe in the forest at the appointed time.  The man smiled andsaid, how can that be done, you are far too small to lead thehorse by the reins.  That's of no consequence, father, if mymother will only harness it, I shall sit in the horse's earand call out to him how he is to go.  Well, answered the man,for once we will try it.
When the time came, the mother harnessed the horse, and placedthumbling in its ear, and then the little creature cried, geeup, gee up.
Then it went quite properly as if with its master, and the cartwent the right way into the forest.  It so happened that justas he was turning a corner, and the little one was crying, geeup, two strange men came towards him.  My word, said one of them,what is this.  There is a cart coming, and a driver is calling tothe horse and still he is not to be seen.  That can't be right,said the other, we will follow the cart and see where it stops.  Thecart, however, drove right into the forest, and exactly to theplace where the wood had been cut.  When thumbling saw hisfather, he cried to him, do you see, father, here I am with thecart, now take me down.  The father got hold of the horse withhis left hand and with the right took his little son out of theear.  Thumbling sat down quite merrily on a straw, but when thetwo strange mensaw him, they did not know what to say forastonishment.  Then one of them took the other aside and said,listen, the little fellow would make our fortune if we exhibitedhim in a large town, for money.  We will buy him.  They went tothe peasant and said, sell us the little man.  He shall be welltreated with us.  No, replied the father, he is the apple of myeye, and all the money in the world cannot buy him from me.
Thumbling, however, when he heard of the bargain, had crept upthe folds of his father's coat, placed himself on his shoulder,and whispered in his ear, father do give me away, I will sooncome back again.  Then the father parted with him to the twomen for a handsome sum of money.  Where will you sit, theysaid to him.  Oh just set me on the rim of your hat, and then Ican walk backwards and forwards and look at the country, andstill not fall down.  They did as he wished, and when thumblinghad taken leave of his father, they went away with him.  Theywalked until it was dusk, and then the little fellow said,do take me down, it is necessary.  Just stay up there, said theman on whose hat he sat, it makes no difference to me.  The birdssometimes let things fall on me.  No, said thumbling, Iknow what's manners, take me quickly down.  The man took his hatoff, and put the little fellow on the ground by the wayside, andhe leapt and crept about a little between the sods, and then hesuddenly slipped into a mousehole which he had sought out.Good evening, gentlemen, just go home without me, he cried tothem, and mocked them.  They ran thither and stuck their sticksinto the mousehole, but it was all in vain.  Thumbling creptstill farther in, and as it soon became quitedark, they were forced to go home with their vexation andtheir empty purses.
When thumbling saw that they were gone, he crept back out of thesubterranean passage.  It is so dangerous to walk on the groundin the dark, said he, how easily a neck or a leg is broken.Fortunately he stumbled against an empty snail-shell.  Thank God,said he, in that I can pass the night in safety.  And got into it.Not long afterwards, when he was just going to sleep, he heard twomen go by, and one of them was saying, how shall we set aboutgetting hold of the rich pastor's silver and gold.  I could tellyou that, cried thumbling, interrupting them.  What was that, saidone of the thieves in fright, I heard someone speaking.  They stoodstill listening, and thumbling spoke again, and said, takeme with you, and I'll help you.
But where are you.  Just look on the ground, and observe fromwhence my voice comes, he replied.  There the thieves at lengthfound him, and lifted him up.  You little imp, how will you helpus, they said.  Listen, said he, I will creep into the pastor'sroom through the iron bars, and will reach out to you whateveryou want to have.  Come then, they said, and we will see what youcan do.  When they got to the pastor's house, thumbling crept intothe room, but instantly cried out with all his might, do you wantto have everything that is here.  The thieves were alarmed, andsaid, but do speak softly, so as not to waken any one.  Thumblinghowever, behaved as if he had not understood this, and criedagain, what do you want.  Do you want to have everything that ishere.  The cook, who slept in the next room, heard this and sat upin bed, and listened.  The thieves, however, had in their frightrun some distance away, but at last they took courage, andthought, the little rascal wants to mock us.  They came back andwhispered to him, come be serious, and reach something out to us.Then thumbling again cried as loudly as he could, I really willgive you everything, just put your hands in.  The maid who waslistening, heard this quite distinctly, and jumped out of bedand rushed to the door.  The thieves took flight, and ran as ifthe wild huntsmanwere behind them, but as the maid could not seeanything, she went to strike a light.  When she came to theplace with it, thumbling, unperceived, betook himself to thegranary, and the maid after she had examined every corner andfound nothing, lay down in her bed again, and believed that,after all, she had only been dreaming with open eyes and ears.Thumbling had climbed up among the hay and found a beautifulplace to sleep in.  There he intended to rest until day, andthen go home again to his parents.  But there were other things instore for him.  Truly, there is much worry and affliction inthis world.  When the day dawned, the maid arose from her bed tofeed the cows.  Her first walk was into the barn, where she laidhold of an armful of hay, and precisely that very one in whichpoor thumbling was lying asleep.  He, however, was sleeping sosoundly that he was aware of nothing, and did not awake until hewas in the mouth of the cow, who had picked him up with the hay.
Ah, heavens, cried he, how have I got into the fulling mill.  Buthe soon discovered where he was. Then he had to take care not tolet himself go between the teeth and be dismembered, but he wassubsequently forced to slip down into the stomach with the hay.In this little room the windows are forgotten, said he, and nosun shines in, neither will a candle be brought.  His quarterswere especially unpleasing to him, and the worst was that moreand more hay was always coming in by the door, and the space grewless and less.  When at length in his anguish, he cried asloud as he could, bring me no more fodder, bring me no morefodder.  The maid was just milking the cow, and when she heardsome one speaking, and saw no one, and perceived that it was thesame voice that she had heard in the night, she was soterrified that she slipped off her stool, and spilt the milk.
She ran in great haste to her master, and said, oh heavens,pastor, the cow has been speaking.  You are mad, replied thepastor, but he went himself to the byre to see what was there.Hardly, however had he set his foot inside when thumbling againcried, bring me no more fodder, bring me no more fodder.  Thenthe pastor himself was alarmed, and thought that an evilspirit had gone into the cow, and ordered her to be killed.  She waskilled, but the stomach, in which thumbling was, was thrown onthe dunghill.  Thumbling had great difficulty in working hisway out.  However, he succeeded so far as to get some room, butjust as he was going to thrust his head out, a new misfortuneoccurred.  A hungry wolf ran thither, and swallowed the wholestomach at one gulp.  Thumbling did not lose courage.  Perhaps,thought he, the wolf will listen to what I have got to say.  Andhe called to him from out of his belly, dear wolf, I know of amagnificent feast for you.
Where is it to be had, said the wolf.In such and such a house.  You must creep into it through thekitchen-sink, and will find cakes, and bacon, and sausages, andas much of them as you can eat.  And he described to him exactlyhis father's house.  The wolf did not require to be told thistwice, squeezed himself in at night through the sink, and ate tohis heart's content in the larder.  When he had eaten his fill,he wanted to go out again, but he had become so big that he couldnot go out by the same way.  Thumbling had reckoned on this, andnow began to make a violent noise in the wolf's body, and ragedand screamed as loudly as he could.  Will you be quiet, said thewolf, you will waken up the people.  What do I care, replied thelittle fellow, you have eaten your fill, and I will make merrylikewise.  And began once more to scream with all his strength.
At last his father and mother were aroused by it, and ran to theroom and looked in through the opening in the door.  When theysaw that a wolf was inside, they ran away, and teh husbandfetched his axe, and the wife the scythe.  Stay behind, said theman, when they entered the room.  When I have given the blow, ifhe is not killed by it, you must cut him down and hew his bodyto pieces.  Then thumbling heard his parents, voices and cried,dear father, I am here, I am in the wolf's body.  Said the father,full of joy, thank God, our dear child has found us again. Andbade thewoman take away her scythe, that thumbling might not be hurtwith it.  After that he raised his arm, and struck the wolfsuch a blow on his head that he fell downdead, and then they got knives and scissors and cut his body openand drew the little fellow forth.
Ah, said the father, what sorrow we have gone through for yoursake.  Yes father, I have gone about the world a great deal.Thank heaven, I breathe fresh air again.  Where have you been,then.  Ah, father, I have been in a mouse's hole, in a cow'sbelly, and then in a wolf's paunch.  Now I will stay with you.And we will not sell you again, no not for all the riches inthe world, said his parents, and they embraced and kissed theirdear thumbling.  They gave him to eat and to drink, and hadsome new clothes made for him, for his own had been spoiledon his journey.There was once a poor servant-girl who was industrious and cleanlyand swept the house every day, and emptied her sweepings on thegreat heap in front of the door.  One morning when she was justgoing back to her work, she found a letter on this heap, and asshe could not read, she put her broom in the corner, and took theletter to her employers, and behold it was an invitation fromthe elves, who asked the girl to hold a child for them at itschristening.  The girl did not know what to do, but, at length,after much persuasion, and as they told her that it was notright to refuse an invitation of this kind, she consented.
Then three elves came and conducted her to a hollow mountain,where the little folks lived.  Everything there was small, butmore elegant and beautiful than can be described.  The baby'smother lay in a bed of black ebony ornamented with pearls, thecovers were embroidered with gold, the cradle was of ivory, thebath-tub of gold.  The girl stood as godmother, and then wantedto go home again, but the little elves urgently entreated her tostay three days with them.  So she stayed, and passed the time inpleasure and gaiety, and the little folks did all they could tomake her happy.  At last she set out on her way home.  But firstthey filled her pockets quite full of money, and then they ledher out of the mountain again.  When she got home, she wanted toto begin her work, and took the broom, which was still standingin the corner, in her hand and began to sweep.  Then somestrangers came out of the house, who asked her who she was, andwhat business she had there.  And she had not, as she thought,been three days with the little men in the mountains, butseven years, and in the meantime her former masters had died.
A certain mother had her child taken out of its cradle by theelves, and a changeling with a large head and staring eyes,which would do nothing but eat and drink, lay in its place.In her trouble she went to her neighbor, and asked her advice.The neighbour said that she was to carry the changeling into thekitchen, set it down on the hearth, light a fire, and boilsome water in two egg-shells, which would make the changelinglaugh, and if he laughed, all would be over with him.  Thewoman did everything that her neighbor bade her.  When she putthe egg-shells with water on the fire, goggle-eyes said, I am asold now as the wester forest, but never yet have I seen anyoneboil anything in an egg-shell.  And he began to laugh at it.
Whilst he was laughing, suddenly came a host of little elves, whobrought the right child, set it down on the hearth, and took thechangeling away with them.
There was once upon a time a miller, who had a beautifuldaughter, and as she was grown up, he wished that she wasprovided for, and well married.  He thought, if any good suitorcomes and asks for her, I will give her to him.  Not longafterwards, a suitor came, who appeared to be very rich, and asthe miller had no fault to find with him, he promised hisdaughter to him.  The maiden, however, did not like him quiteso much as a girl should like the man to whom she is engaged, andhad no confidence in him.  Whenever she saw, or thought of him,she felt a secret horror.  Once he said to her, you are mybetrothed, and yet you have never once paid me a visit. Themaiden replied, I know not where your house is. Then said thebridegroom, my house is out there in the dark forest.  Shetried to excuse herselfand said she could not find the way there.  The bridegroom said,next sunday you must come out there to me, I have alreadyinvited the guests, and I will strew ashes in order that you mayfind your way through the forest.  When sunday came, and themaiden had to set out on her way, she became very uneasy, sheherself knew not exactly why, and to mark her way she filled bothher pockets full of peas and lentils.  Ashes were strewn at theentrance of the forest, and these she followed, but at every stepshe threw a couple of peas on the ground.  She walked almost thewhole day until she reached the middle of the forest, where itwas the darkest, and there stood a solitary house, which she didnot like, for it looked so dark and dismal.  She went inside it,but no one was within, and the most absolute stillness reigned.
Suddenly a voice cried,	turn back, turn back, young maiden dear,	'tis a murderer's house you enter here.The maiden looked up, and saw that the voice came from a bird,which was hanging in a cage on the wall.  Again  it cried,	turn back, turn back, young maiden dear,	'tis a murderer's house you enter here.
Then the young maiden went on farther from one room to another,and walked through the whole house, but it was entirely emptyand not one human being was to be found.  At last she came to thethe cellar, and there sat an extremely aged woman, whose headshook constantly.  Can you not tell me, said the maiden, if mybetrothed lives here.
Alas, poor child, replied the old woman, whither have you come.You are in a murderer's den.  You think you are a bride soon to bemarried, but you will keep your wedding with death.  Look, Ihave been forced to put a great kettle on there, with water in it,and when they have you in their power, they will cut you topieces without mercy, will cook you, and eat you, for they areeaters of human flesh.  If I do not have compassion on you, andsave you, you are lost.
Thereupon the old woman led her behind a great hogsheadwhere she could not be seen.  Be still as a mouse, said she, donot make a sound, or move, or all will be over with you.  Atnight, when the robbers are asleep, we will escape, I have longwaited for an opportunity.  Hardly was this done, than the godlesscrew came home.  They dragged with them another young girl.  Theywere drunk, and paid no heed to her screams and lamentations.
They gave her wine to drink, three glasses full, one glass ofwhite wine, one glass of red, and a glass of yellow, and withthis her heart burst in twain.  Thereupon they tore off herdelicate raiment, laid her on a table, cut her beautiful bodyin pieces and strewed salt thereon.  The poor bride behind thecask trembled and shook, for she saw right well what fate therobbers had destined for her.  One of them noticed a gold ring onthe finger of the murdered girl, and as it would not come off atonce, he took an axe and cut the finger off, but it sprang up inthe air, away over the cask and fell straight into the bride'sbosom.  The robber took a candle and wanted to look for it, butcould not find it.  Then another of them said, have youlooked behind the great hogshead.  But the old woman cried,come and get something to eat, and leave off looking till themorning, the finger won't run away from you.
Then the robbers said, the old woman is right, and gave up theirsearch, and sat down to eat, and the old woman poured asleeping-draught in their wine, so that they soon lay downin the cellar, and slept and snored.  When the bride heardthat, she came out from behind the hogshead, and had to stepover the sleepers, for they lay in rows on the ground, and greatwas her terror lest she should waken one of them.  But Godhelped her, and she got safely over.  The old woman went up withher, opened the doors, and they hurried out of the murderer's denwith all the speed in their power.  The wind had blown away thestrewn ashes, but the peas and lentils had sprouted and grown up,and showed them the way in the moonlight. They walked the wholenight, until in the morning they arrived at the mill, and then themaiden told her father everything exactly as it had happened.
When the day came for the wedding to be celebrated, the bridegroomappeared, and the miller had invited all his relations andfriends.  As they sat at table, each was bidden to relatesomething.  The bride sat still, and said nothing.  Then said thebridegroom to the bride, come, my darling, do you know nothing.Relate something to us like the rest.  She replied, then I willrelate a dream.  I was walking alone through a wood, and at lastI came to a house, in which no living soul was, but on the wallthere was a bird in a cage which cried,	turn back, turn back, young maiden dear,	'tis a murderer's house you enter here.And this it cried once more.  My darling, I only dreamt this.
Then I went through all the rooms, and they were all empty, andthere was something so horrible about them.  At last I went downinto the cellar, and there sat a very very old woman, whose headshook.  I asked her, does my bridegroom live in this house.  Sheanswered, alas poor child, you have got into a murderer's den,your bridegroom does live here, but he will hew you in pieces,and kill you, and then he will cook you, and eat you.  My darlingI only dreamt this.  But the old woman hid me behind a greathogshead, and scarcely was I hidden, when the robbers came home,dragging a maiden with them, to whom they gave three kinds ofwine to drink, white, red, and yellow, with which her heart brokein twain.  My darling, I only dreamt this.  Thereupon they pulledoff her pretty clothes, and hewed her fair body in pieces on atable, and sprinkled them with salt.  My darling, I only dreamtthis.  And one of the robbers saw that there was still a ring onher little finger, and as it was hard to draw off, he took an axeand cut it off, but the finger sprang up in the air, and sprangbehind the great hogshead, and fell in my bosom.  And there is thefinger with the ring.  And with these words she drew it forth, andshowed it to those present.
The robber, who had during this story become as pale as ashes,leapt up and wanted to escape, but the guests held him fast, anddelivered him over to justice.  Then he and his whole troop wereexecuted for their infamous deeds.A poor man had so many children that he had already askedeveryone in the world to be godfather, and when still anotherchild was born, no one else was left whom he could invite.He knew not what to do, and, in his perplexity, he lay downand fell asleep.  Then he dreamt that he was to go outside thegate,and ask the first person he met to be godfather.  When he awoke,he determined to obey his dream, and went outside the gate, andasked the first person who came up to him to be godfather.  Thestranger presented him with a little glass of water, and said,this is a wonderful water, with it you can heal the sick, onlyyou must see where death is standing.  If he is standing by thepatient's head, give the patient some of the water and he willbe healed, but if death is standing by his feet, all troublewill be in vain, for the sick man must die.  From this time forth,the man could always say whether a patient could be saved ornot, and became famous for his skill, and earned a great dealof money.  Once he was called in to the child of the king, andwhen he entered, he saw death standing by the child's head andcured it with the water, and he did the same a second time, butthe third time death was standing by its feet, and then he knewthe child had to die.
Once the man thought he would visit the godfather, and tell himhow he had succeeded with the water.  But when he entered thehouse, the strangest things were going on within.  On the firstflight of stairs, the broom and shovel were disputing, andknocking each other about violently.  He asked them, where doesthe godfather live.  The broom replied, one flight of stairshigher up.  When he came to the second flight, he saw a heap ofdead fingers lying.  He asked, where does the godfather live.One of the fingers replied, one flight of stairs higher.  Onthe third flight lay a heap of dead heads, which again directedhim to the flight beyond.  On the fourth flight, he saw fishes onthe fire, which frizzled in pans and baked themselves.  They,too, said, one flight of stairs higher.  And when he hadascended the fifth, he came to the door of a room and peepedthrough the keyhole, and there he saw the godfather who hada pair of long horns.  When he opened the door and went in,the godfather got into bed in a great hurry and covered himselfup.  Then said the man, sir godfather, what a strange house-holdyou have.  When I came to your first flight of stairs, the shoveland broom were quarreling, and beating each other violently.How stupid you are, said the godfather.  That was the boyand the maid talking to each other.  But on the second flight Isaw dead fingers lying.  Oh, how silly you are.  Those were someroots of scorzonera.  On the third flight lay a heap of deadmen's heads.  Foolish man, those were cabbages.  On the fourthflight I saw fishes in a pan, which were hissing and bakingthemselves.  When he had said that, the fishes came and servedthemselves up.  And when I got to the fifth flight, I peepedthrough the keyhole of a door, and there, godfather, I sawyou and you had long, long horns.  Oh, that is not true.  Theman became alarmed, and ran out, and if he had not, who knowswhat the godfather would have done to him.There was once a little girl who was obstinate and inquisitive,and when her parents told her to do anything, she did not obeythem, so how could she fare well.  One day she said to herparents, I have heard so much of frau trude, I will go to hersome day.  People say that everything about her does look sostrange, and that there are such odd things in her house, thatI have become quite curious.  Her parents absolutely forbadeher, and said, frau trude is a bad woman, who does wicked things,and if you go to her, you are no longer our child.  But the maidendid not let herself be turned aside by her parents, prohibition,and still went to frau trude.  And when she got to her, frautrude said, why are you so pale.  Ah, she replied, and her wholebody trembled, I have been so terrified at what I have seen.  Whathave you seen.  I saw a black man on your steps.  That was acollier.  Then I saw a green man.  That was a huntsman.  Afterthat I saw a blood-red man.  That was a butcher.  Ah, frautrude, I was terrified.  I looked through the window and sawnot you, but, as I verily believe, the devil himself with a headof fire.  Oho. Said she, then you have seen the witch in herproper costume.  I have been waiting for you, and wanting youa long time already.  You shall give me some light.  Then shechanged the girl into a block of wood, and threw it into thefire.  And when it was in a full blaze she sat down close to it,and warmed herself by it, and said, that shines bright for oncein a way.A poor man had twelve children and was forced to work night andday to give them even bread.  When therefore the thirteenthcame into the world, he knew not what to do in his trouble,but ran out into the great highway, and resolved to ask thefirst person whom he met to be godfather.  The first to meethim was the good God who already knew what filled his heart,and said to him, poor man, I pity you.  I will hold your childat its christening, and will take charge of it and make ithappy on earth.  The man said, who are you.  I am God.  ThenI do not desire to have you for a godfather, said the man, you giveto the rich, and leave the poor to hunger.  Thus spoke the man,for he did not know how wisely God apportions riches andpoverty.  He turned therefore away from the Lord, and wentfarther.  Then the devil came to him and said, what do you seek.If you will take me as a godfather for your child, I will give himgold in plenty and all the joys of the world as well.  The manasked, who are you.  I am the devil.  Then I do not desire to haveyou for godfather, said the man, you deceive men and lead themastray.  He went onwards, and then came death striding up tohim with withered legs, and said, take me as godfather.  Theman asked, who are you.  I am death, and I make all equal.  Thensaid the man,you are the right one, you take the rich as well as the poor,without distinction, you shall be godfather.  Death answered,I will make your child rich and famous, for he who has me for afriend can lack nothing.  The man said, next sunday is thechristening, be there at the right time.  Death appeared as hehad promised, and stood godfather quite in the usual way.When the boy had grown up, his godfather one day appearedand bade him go with him.  He led him forth into a forest, andshowed him a herb which grew there, and said, now you shallreceive your godfather's present.  I make you a celebratedphysician.  When you are called to a patient, I will always appearto you.  If I stand by the head of the sick man, you may say withconfidence that you will make him well again, and if you givehim of this herb he will recover, but if I stand by the patient'sfeet, he is mine, and you must say that all remedies are invain, and that no physician in the world could save him.  Butbeware of using the herb against my will, or it might fareill with you.
It was not long before the youth was the most famous physicianin the whole world.  He had only to look at the patient and heknew his condition at once, whether he would recover, or mustneeds die.  So they said of him, and from far and wide peoplecame to him, sent for him when they had anyone ill, and gave himso much money that he soon became a rich man.  Now it so befellthat the king became ill, and the physician was summoned, andwas to say if recovery were possible.  But when he came to the bed,death was standing by the feet of the sick man, and the herbdid not grow which could save him.  If I could but cheat death foronce, thought the physician, he is sure to take it ill if I dobut, as I am his godson, he will shut one eye, I will risk it.  Hetherefore took up the sick man, and laid him the other way, sothat now death was standing by his head.  Then he gave the kingsome of the herbs, and he recovered and grew healthy again.
But death came to the physician, looking very black andangry, threatened him with his finger, and said, you have betrayedme, this time I will pardonit, as you are my godson, but if you venture it again, itwill cost you your neck, for I will take you yourself awaywith me.
Soon afterwards the king's daughter fell into a severe illness.She was his only child, and he wept day and night, so that hebegan to lose the sight of his eyes, and he caused it to bemade known that whosoever rescued her from death should be herhusband and inherit the crown.  When the physician came to thesick girl's bed, he saw death by her feet.  He ought to haveremembered the warning given by his godfather, but he was soinfatuated by the great beauty of the king's daughter, and thehappiness of becoming her husband, that he flung all thought tothe winds.  He did not see that death was casting angry glanceson him, that he was raising his hand in the air, and threateninghim with his withered fist.  He raised up the sick girl,and placed her head where her feet had lain.  Then he gaveher some of the herb, and instantly her cheeks flushed red,and life stirred afresh in her.
When death saw that for a second time his own property had beenmisused, he walked up to the physician with long strides, andsaid, all is over with you, and now the lot falls on you, andseized him so firmly with his ice-cold hand, that he could notresist, and led him into a cave below the earth.  There hesaw how thousands and thousands of candles were burning incountless rows, some large, some medium-sized, others small.Every instant some were extinguished, and others again burnt up,so that the flames seemed to leap hither and thither inperpetual change.  See, said death, these are the lights ofmen's lives.  The large ones belong to children, the medium-sizedones to married people in their prime, the little ones belongto old people, but children and young folks likewise haveoften only a tiny candle.  Show me the light of my life, saidthe physician, and he thought that it would be still verytall.  Death pointed to a little end which was just threateningto go out, and said, behold, it is there.  Ah, dear godfather,said the horrified physician, light a new one for me, do it forlove of me, that I may enjoy my life, be king, and the husband ofthe king's beautiful daughter.  I cannot, answered death,one must go outbefore a new one is lighted.  Then place the old one on a newone, that will go on burning at once when the old one has cometo an end, pleaded the physician.  Death behaved as if he weregoing to fulfill his wish, and took hold of a tall new candle,but as he desired to revenge himself, he purposely made a mistakein fixing it, and the little piece fell down and was extinguished.Immediately the physician fell on the ground, and now he himselfwas in the hands of death.A certain tailor had a son, who happened to be small, andno bigger than a thumb, and on this account he was alwayscalled thumbling.  He had, however, some courage in him, andsaid to his father, father, I must and will go out into theworld.  That's right, my son, said the old man, and took along darning-needle and made a knob of sealing-wax on it at thehandle, and there is a sword for you to take with you on the way.Then the little tailor wanted to have one more meal with them,and hopped into the kitchen to see what his mother had cookedfor the last time.  But it was already served, and the dish stoodon the hearth.  Then he said, mother, what is there to eat to-day.See for yourself, said his mother.  So thumbling jumped on to thehearth, and peeped into the dish, but as he stretched his neckin too far the steam from the food caught hold of him, and carriedhim up the chimney.  He rode about in the air on the steam for awhile, until at length he sank down to the ground again.  Nowthe little tailor was outside in the wide world, and he traveledabout, and went to a master in his craft, but the food was notgood enough for him.  Mistress, if you give us no better food,said thumbling, I will go away, and early to-morrow morningI will write with chalk onthe door of your house - too many potatoes, too little meat.
Farewell, mr. Potato-king.  What would you have forsooth,grasshopper, said the mistress, and grew angry, and seizeda dishcloth, and was just going to strike him, but my littletailor crept nimbly under a thimble, peeped out from beneath it,and put his tongue out at the mistress.  She took up the thimble,and wanted to get hold of him, but little thumbling hopped intothe cloth, and while the mistress was opening it out and lookingfor him, he got into a crevice in the table.  Ho, ho, ladymistress, cried he, and thrust his head out, and when she beganto strike him he leapt down into the drawer.  At last, however,she caught him and drove him out of the house.
The little tailor journeyed on and came to a great forest, andthere he fell in with a band of robbers who had a design tosteal the king's treasure.  When they saw the little tailor,they thought, a little fellow like that can creep through akey-hole and serve as picklock to us.  HI, there, cried one ofthem, you giant goliath, will you go to the treasure-chamberwith us.  You can slip yourself in and throw out the money.Thumbling reflected a while, and at length he said, yes, and wentwith them to the treasure-chamber.  Then he looked at the doorsabove and below, to see if there was any crack in them.  It wasnot long before he espied one which was broad enough to lethim in.  He was therefore about to get in at once, but oneof the two sentries who stood before the door, observed him, andsaid to the other, what an ugly spider is creeping there, Iwill kill it.  Let the poor creature alone, said the other,it has done you no harm.  Then thumbling got safely through thecrevice into the treasure-chamber, opened the window beneathwhich the robbers were standing, and threw out to them onetaler after another.  When the little tailor was in the fullswing of his work, he heard the king coming to inspect histreasure-chamber, and crept hastily into a hiding-place.  The kingnoticed that several solid talers were missing, but could notconceive who could have stolen them, for locks and bolts werein good condition, and allseemed well guarded.  Then he went away again, and said to thesentries, be on the watch, someone is after the money.  Whentherefore thumbling recommenced his labors, they heard the moneymoving, and a sound of klink, klink, klink.  They ran swiftlyin to seize the thief, but the little tailor, who heard themcoming, was still swifter, and leapt into a corner and coveredhimself with a taler, so that nothing could be seen of him, andat the same time he mocked the sentries and cried, here am I.The sentries ran thither, but as they got there, he hadalready hopped into another corner under a taler, and wascrying, ho, ho, here am I.  And thus he made fools of them,and drove them so long round about the treasure-chamber thatthey were weary and went away.  Then by degrees he threw all thetalers out, dispatching the last with all his might, then hoppednimbly upon it, and flew down with it through the window.  Therobbers paid him great compliments.  You are a valiant hero,said they, will you be our captain.
Thumbling, however, declined, and said he wanted to see theworld first.  They now divided the booty, but the little tailoronly asked for a kreuzer because he could not carry more.Then he once more buckled on his sword, bade the robbers goodbye,and took to the road.  First, he went to work with some masters,but he had no liking for that, and at last he hired himselfas manservant in an inn.  The maids, however, could not endurehim, for he saw all they did secretly, without theirseeing him, and he told their employers what they had taken offthe plates, and carried away out of the cellar, for themselves.Then said they, wait, and we will pay you out, and arranged witheach other to play him a trick.  Soon afterwards when one of themaids was mowing in the garden, and saw thumbling jumping aboutand creeping up and down the plants, she mowed him up quickly withthe grass, tied all in a great cloth, and secretly threw it tothe cows.  Now amongst them there was a great black one, whoswallowed him down without hurting him.  Down below, however, itdid not suit him, for itwas quite dark, neither was any candle burning.  When the cowwas being milked he cried,          strip, strap, strull,          when will the pail be full.
But the noise of the milking prevented his being understood.After this the master of the house came into the stall andsaid, that cow shall be killed to-morrow.  Then thumbling was soalarmed that he cried out in a clear voice, let me out first,I am sitting inside her.  The master heard that quite well,but did not know from whence the voice came.  Where are you, askedhe.  In the black one, answered thumbling, but the masterdid not understand what that meant, and went out.
Next morning the cow was killed.  Happily thumbling did not meetwith one blow at the cutting up and chopping, he got amongthe sausage-meat.  And when the butcher came in and began hiswork, he cried out with all his might, don't chop too deep,don't chop too deep, I am amongst it.  No one heard this becauseof the noise of the chopping-knife.  Now poor thumbling was introuble, but trouble sharpens the wits, and he sprang out soadroitly between the blows that none of them touched him, andhe escaped with a whole skin.  But still he could not get away,there was nothing for it but to let himself be thrust into ablack-pudding with the bits of bacon.  His quarters there wererather confined, and besides that he was hung up in the chimneyto be smoked, and there time did hang terribly heavy on his hands.At length in winter he was taken down again, as the black-puddinghad to be set before a guest.  When the hostess was cuttingit in slices, he took care not to stretch out his head toofar lest a bit of it should be cut off, at last he saw hisopportunity, cleared a passage for himself, and jumped out.
The little tailor, however, would not stay any longer in a housewhere he fared so ill, so at once set out on his journey again.But his liberty did not last long.  In the open country he metwith a fox who snapped him up without thinking.  HI, there,mr. Fox, criedthe little tailor, it is I who am sticking in your throat, setme at liberty again.  You are right, answered the fox.  Youare next to nothing for me, but if you will promise me thefowls in your father's yard I will let you go.  With all myheart, replied thumbling.  You shall have all the cocks and hens,that I promise you.  Then the fox let him go again, and himselfcarried him home.  When the father once more saw his dear son,he willingly gave the fox all the fowls which he had.  For thisI likewise bring you a handsome bit of money, said thumbling, andgave his father the kreuzer which he earned on his travels.But why did the fox get the poor chickens to eat.  Oh, yousilly, your father would surely love his child far more than thefowls in the yard.There was once a wizard who used to take the form of a poorman, and went to houses and begged, and caught pretty girls.No one knew whither he carried them, for they were neverseen again.  One day he appeared before the door of a manwho had three pretty daughters.  He looked like a poor weakbeggar, and carried a basket on his back, as if he meant to collectcharitable gifts in it.  He begged for a little food, and whenthe eldest daughter came out and was just handing him apiece of bread, he did but touch her, and she was forced to jumpinto his basket.  Thereupon he hurried off with long strides, andcarried her away into a dark forest to his house, which stoodin the midst of it.  Everything in the house was magnificent.He gave her whatsoever she could possibly desire, and said,my darling, you will certainly be happy with me, for you haveeverything your heart can wish for.  This lasted a few days, andthen he said, I must journey forth, andleave you alone for a short time.  Here are the keys of the house.You may go everywhere and look at everything except into oneroom, which this little key opens, and there I forbid you to goon pain of death.  He likewise gave her an egg and said, preservethe egg carefully for me, and carry it continually about with you,for a great misfortune would arise from the loss of it.
She took the keys and the egg, and promised to obey him ineverything.  When he was gone, she went all round the house from thebottom to the top, and examined everything.  The rooms shone withsilver and gold, and she thought she had never seen such greatsplendor.  At length she came to the forbidden door.  She wished topass it by, but curiosity let her have no rest.  She examined thekey, it looked just like any other.  She put it in the keyhole andturned it a little, and the door sprang open.  But what did shesee when she went in.  A great bloody basin stood in the middleof the room, and therein lay human beings, dead and hewn to pieces,and hard by was a block of wood, and a gleaming axe lay upon it.She was so terribly alarmed that the egg which she held in herhand fell into the basin.  She got it out and wiped the blood off,but in vain, it appeared again in a moment.  She washed andscrubbed, but she could not get it off.
It was not long before the man came back from his journey, andthe first things which he asked for were the key and the egg.She gave them to him, but she trembled as she did so, and he sawat once by the red spots that she had been in the bloody chamber.Since you have gone into the room against my will, said he, youshall go back into it against your own.  Your life is ended.He threw her down, dragged her along by her hair, cut her head offon the block, and hewed her in pieces so that her blood ran onthe ground.  Then he threw her into the basin with the rest.
Now I will fetch myself the second, said the wizard, and again hewent to the house in the shape of a poor man, and begged.  Thenthe second daughter brought him a piece of bread.  He caught herlike the first, by simply touching her, and carried her away.She did not fare better than her sister.  She allowed herself to beledaway by her curiosity, opened the door of the bloody chamber,looked in, and had to atone for it with her life on the wizard'sreturn.  Then he went and brought the third sister, but shewas clever and wily.  When he had given her the keys and the egg,and had left her, she first put the egg away with great care, andthen she examined the house, and at last went into the forbiddenroom.  Alas, what did she behold.  Both her dear sisters lay therein the basin, cruelly murdered, and cut into pieces.  But shebegan to gather their limbs together and put them in order, head,body, arms and legs.  And when nothing further was wanting thelimbs began to move and unite themselves together, and both themaidens opened their eyes and were once more alive.  Then theyrejoiced and kissed and caressed each other.
On his arrival, the man at once demanded the keys and the egg,and as he could perceive no trace of any blood on it, he said,you have stood the test, you shall be my bride.  He now hadno longer any power over her, and was forced to do whatsoevershe desired.  Oh, very well, said she, you shall first take abasketful of gold to my father and mother, and carry ityourself on your back.  In the meantime I will prepare for thewedding.  Then she ran to her sisters, whom she had hiddenin a little chamber, and said, the moment has come when I cansave you.  The wretch shall himself carry you home again, butas soon as you are at home send help to me.  She put both ofthem in a basket and covered them quite over with gold, sothat nothing of them was to be seen.  Then she called in thewizard and said to him, now carry the basket away, but Ishall look through my little window and watch to see if youstop on the way to stand or to rest.
The wizard raised the basket on his back and went away withit, but it weighed him down so heavily that the sweat streamedfrom his face.  Then he sat down and wanted to rest awhile, butimmediately one of the girls in the basket cried, I am lookingthrough my little window, and I see that you are resting.Will you go on at once.  He thought it was his bride who wastalking tohim, and he got up on his legs again.  Once more he was going tosit down, but instantly she cried, I am looking through mylittle window, and I see that you are resting.  Will you go ondirectly.  And whenever he stood still, she cried this, and thenhe was forced to go onwards, until at last, groaning and outof breath, he took the basket with the gold and the twomaidens into their parents, house.  At home, however, thebride prepared the marriage-feast, and sent invitations to thefriends of the wizard.  Then she took a skull with grinningteeth, put some ornaments on it and a wreath of flowers,carried it upstairs to the garret-window, and let it look outfrom thence.  When all was ready, she got into a barrel ofhoney, and then cut the feather-bed open and rolled herselfin it, until she looked like a wondrous bird, and no one couldrecognize her.  Then she went out of the house, and on herway she met some of the wedding-guests, who asked,          o, fitcher's bird, how com'st thou here.          I come from fitcher's house quite near.          And what may the young bride be doing.          From cellar to garret she's swept all clean,          and now from the window she's peeping, I ween.
At last she met the bridegroom, who was coming slowly back.He, like the others, asked,          o, fitcher's bird, how com'st thou here.          I come from fitcher's house quite near.          And what may the young bride be doing.          From cellar to garret she's swept all clean,          and now from the window she's peeping, I ween.
The bridegroom looked up, saw the decked-out skull, thought itwas his bride, and nodded to her, greeting her kindly.  Butwhen he and his guests had all gone into the house, thebrothers and kinsmen of the bride, who had been sent to rescueher, arrived.  They locked all the doors of the house, that noone might escape, set fire to it, and the wizard and all hiscrew had to burn.It is now long ago, quite two thousand years, since there wasa rich man who had a beautiful and pious wife, and they lovedeach other dearly.  They had, however, no children, though theywished for them very much, and the woman prayed for them dayand night, but still they had none.  Now there was a court-yardin front of their house in which was a juniper tree, and one dayin winter the woman was standing beneath it, paring herself anapple, and while she was paring herself the apple she cut herfinger, and the blood fell on the snow.  Ah, said the woman,and sighed right heavily, and looked at the blood before her, andwas most unhappy, ah, if I had but a child as red as blood andas white as snow.  And while she thus spoke, she became quitehappy in her mind, and felt just as if that were going to happen.Then she went into the house and a month went by and the snowwas gone, and two months, and then everything was green, and threemonths, and then all the flowers came out of the earth, and fourmonths, and then all the trees in the wood grew thicker, and thegreen branches were all closely entwined, and the birds sanguntil the wood resounded and the blossoms fell from the trees,then the fifth month passed away and she stood under the junipertree, which smelt so sweetly that her heart leapt, and she fellon her knees and was beside herself with joy, and when the sixthmonth was over the fruit was large and fine, and then she wasquite still, and the seventh month she snatched at thejuniper-berries and ate them greedily, then she grew sick andsorrowful, then the eighth month passed, and she called herhusband to her, and wept and said, if I die then bury mebeneath the juniper tree.  Then she was quite comforted andhappy until the next month was over, and then she had a childas white as snow and as red as blood, and when she beheld itshe was so delighted that she died.
Then her husband buried her beneath the juniper tree, and hebegan to weep sore, after some time he was more at ease, andthough he still wept he could bear it, and after some timelonger he took another wife.
By the second wife he had a daughter, but the first wife's childwas a little son, and he was as red as blood and as white as snow.When the woman looked at her daughter she loved her very much,but then she looked at the little boy and it seemed to cut herto the heart, for the thought came into her mind that he wouldalways stand in her way, and she was for ever thinking how shecould get all the fortune for her daughter, and the evil one filledher mind with this till she was quite wroth with the little boyand she pushed him from one corner to the other and slapped himhere and cuffed him there, until the poor child was in continualterror, for when he came out of school he had no peace in anyplace.
One day the woman had gone upstairs to her room, and her littledaughter went up too, and said, mother, give me an apple.  Yes,my child, said the woman, and gave her a fine apple out of thechest, but the chest had a great heavy lid with a great sharpiron lock.  Mother, said the little daughter, is brother notto have one too.  This made the woman angry, but she said, yes,when he comes out of school.  And when she saw from the windowthat he was coming, it was just as if the devil entered into her,and she snatched at the apple and took it away again from herdaughter, and said,  you shall not have one before your brother.
Then she threw the apple into the chest, and shut it.  Then thelittle boy came in at the door, and the devil made her say tohim kindly, my son, will you have an apple. And she looked wickedlyat him.  Mother, said the little boy, how dreadful you look.Yes, give me an apple.  Then it seemed to her as if she wereforced to say to him, come with me, and she opened the lidof the chest and said, take out an apple for yourself, andwhile the little boy was stooping inside, the devil promptedher, and crash.  She shut the lid down, and his head flew off andfell among the red apples.  Then she was overwhelmed withterror, and thought, if I could but make them think that itwas not done by me.  So she went upstairs to her room to herchest of drawers, and took a white handkerchief out of the topdrawer, and set the head on the neck again, and folded thehandkerchief so that nothing could be seen, and she set himon a chair in front of the door, and put the apple in his hand.
After this Marlinchen came into the kitchen to her mother,who was standing by the fire with a pan of hot water before herwhich she was constantly stirring round.  "Mother," said Marlinchen,"brother is sitting at the door, and he looks quite white andhas an apple in his hand.  I asked him to give me the apple,but he did not answer me, and I was quite frightened."  "Go backto him," said her mother, "and if he will not answer you, give hima box on the ear."  So Marlinchen went to him and said, "Brother,give me the apple."  But he was silent, and she gave him a boxon the ear, whereupon his head fell off.  Marlinchen was terrified,and began crying and screaming, and ran to her mother, and said,"Alas, mother, I have knocked my brother's head off," and she weptand wept and could not be comforted.  "Marlinchen," said the mother,what have you done, but be quiet and let no one know it, itcannot be helped now, we will make him into black-puddings."Then the mother took the little boy and chopped him in pieces,put him into the pan and made him into black puddings, butMarlinchen stood by weeping and weeping, and all her tears fellinto the pan and there was no need of any salt.
Then the father came home, and sat down to dinner and said,"But where is my son?"  And the mother served up a great dish ofblack-puddings, and Marlinchen wept and could not leave off.Then the father again said, "But where is my son?"  "Ah," said themother, "he has gone across the coutry to his mother's greatuncle, he will stay there awhile."  "And what is he going to dothere?  He did not even say good-bye to me."
"Oh, he wanted to go, and asked me if he might stay six weeks,he is well taken care of there."  "Ah," said the man, "I feel sounhappy lest all should not be right.  He ought to have saidgood-bye to me."  With that he began to eat and said, "Marlinchen,why are you crying?  Your brother will certainly come back."Then he said, "Ah, wife, how delicious this food is, give mesome more."  And the more he ate the more he wanted to have,and he said, "Give me some more, you shall have none of it.It seems to me as if it were all mine."  And he ate and ate andthrew all the bones under the table, until he had finishedthe whole.  But Marlinchen went away to her chest of drawers,and took her best silk handkerchief out of the bottom draw,and got all the bones from beneath the table, and tied them up inher silk handkerchief, and carried them outside the door,weeping tears of blood.  Then she lay down under the junipertree on the green grass, and after she had lain down there, shesuddenly felt light-hearted and did not cry any more.  Thenthe juniper tree began to stir itself, and the branches partedasunder, and moved together again, just as if someone wererejoicing and clapping his hands.  At the same time a mist seemedto arise from the tree, and in the center of this mist it burnedlike a fire, and a beautiful bird flew out of the fire singingmagnificently, and he flew high up in the air, and when he was gone,the juniper tree was just as it had been before, and thehandkerchief with the bones was no longer there.  Marlinchen,however, was as gay and happy as if her brother were still alive.And she went merrily into the house, and sat down to dinner andate.
But the bird flew away and lighted on a goldsmith's house, andbegan to sing -     my mother she killed me,     my father he ate me,     my sister, little marlinchen,     gathered together all my bones,     tied them in a silken handkerchief,     laid them beneath the juniper tree,     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.
The goldsmith was sitting in his workshop making a golden chain,when he heard the bird which was sitting singing on his roof,and very beautiful the song seemed to him.  He stood up, butas he crossed the threshold he lost one of his slippers.But he went away right up the middle of the street with oneshoe on and one sock, he had his apron on, and in one hand hehad the golden chain and in the other the pincers, and the sun wasshining brightly on the street.  Then he went right on and stoodstill, and said to the bird, "Bird," said he then, "how beautifullyyou can sing.  Sing me that piece again."  "No," said the bird,"I'll not sing it twice for nothing.  Give me the golden chain,and then I will sing it again for you."  "There," said the goldsmith,"there is the golden chain for you, now sing me that song again."Then the bird came and took the golden chain in his right claw,and went and sat in front of the goldsmith, and sang -
     my mother she killed me,     my father he ate me,     my sister, little marlinchen,     gathered together all my bones,     tied them in a silken handkerchief,     laid them beneath the juniper tree,     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.
Then the bird flew away to a shoemaker, and lighted on hisroof and sang -
     my mother she killed me,     my father he ate me,     my sister, little marlinchen,     gathered together all my bones,     tied them in a silken handkerchief,     laid them beneath the juniper tree,     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.
The shoemaker heard that and ran out of doors in his shirt sleeves,and looked up at his roof, and was forced to hold his hand beforehis eyes lest the sun should blind him.  "Bird," said he, "howbeautifully you can sing."  Then he called in at his door,"Wife, just come outside, there is a bird, look at that bird, hecertainly can sing."  Then he called his daughter and children,and apprentices, boys and girls, and they all came up thestreet and looked at the bird and saw how beautiful he was, andwhat fine red and green feathers he had, and how like real goldhis neck was, and how the eyes in his head shone like stars.  "Bird,"said the shoemaker, "now sing me that song again."  "Nay," said thebird, "I do not sing twice for nothing, you must give me something.""Wife," said the man, "go to the garret, upon the top shelf therestands a pair of red shoes, bring them down."  Then the wifewent and brought the shoes.  "There, bird," said the man, "nowsing me that piece again."  Then the bird came and took the shoesin his left claw, and flew back on the roof, and sang -     my mother she killed me,     my father he ate me,     my sister, little Marlinchen,     gathered together all my bones,     tied them in a silken handkerchief,     laid them beneath the juniper tree,     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.
and when he had finished his song he flew away.  In his rightclaw he had the chain and in his left the shoes, and he flew faraway to a mill, and the mill went, klipp klapp, klipp klapp,klipp klapp, and in the mill sat twenty miller's men hewing astone, and cutting, hick hack, hick hack, hick hack, and the millwent klipp klapp, klipp klapp'klipp klapp.  Then the bird wentand sat on a lime-tree which stood in front of the mill, andsang -     my mother she killed me,then one of them stopped working,     my father he ate me,then two more stopped working and listened to that,     my sister, little Marlinchen,then four more stopped,     gathered together all my bones,     tied them in a silken handkerchief,now eight only were hewing,     laid them beneath,now only five,     the juniper tree,and now only one,     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.
Then the last stopped also, and heard the last words.  "Bird,"said he, "how beautifully you sing.  Let me, too, hear that.Sing that once more for me."
"Nay," said the bird, "I will not sing twice for nothing.  Give methe millstone, and then I will sing it again."
"Yes," said he, "if it belonged to me only, you should have it.""Yes," said the others, "if he sings again he shall have it."  Thenthe bird came down, and the twenty millers all set to work with abeam and raised the stone up.  And the bird stuck his neckthrough the hole, and put the stone on as if it were a collar,and flew on to the tree again, and sang -     my mother she killed me,     my father he ate me,     my sister, little Marlinchen,     gathered together all my bones,     tied them in a silken handkerchief,     laid them beneath the juniper tree,     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.
And when he had done singing, he spread his wings, and in hisright claw he had the chain, and in his left the shoes, andround his neck the millstone, and he flew far away to his father'shouse.
In the room sat the father, the mother, and Marlinchen at dinner,and the father said, "How light-hearted I feel, how happy I am.""Nay," said the mother, "I feel so uneasy, just as if a heavystorm were coming."  Marlinchen, however, sat weeping and weeping,and then came the bird flying, and as it seated itself on theroof the father said, "Ah, I feel so truly happy, and the sun isshining so beautifully outside, I feel just as if I were aboutto see some old friend again."  "Nay," said the woman, "I feel soanxious, my teeth chatter, and I seem to have fire in my veins."And she tore her stays open, but Marlinchen sat in a corner crying,and held her plate before her eyes and cried till it was quitewet.  Then the bird sat on the juniper tree, and sang -     my mother she killed me,then the mother stopped her ears, and shut her eyes, and wouldnot see or hear, but there was a roaring in her ears like themost violent storm, and her eyes burnt and flashed likelightning -     my father he ate me,"Ah, mother," says the man, "that is a beautiful bird.  He sings sosplendidly, and the sun shines so warm, and there is a smell justlike cinnamon."     My sister, little Marlinchen,then Marlinchen laid her head on her knees and wept withoutceasing, but the man said, "I am going out, I must see the birdquite close."  "Oh, don't go," said the woman, "I feel as if thewhole house were shaking and on fire."  But the man went out andlooked at the bird.     gathered together all my bones,     tied them in a silken handkerchief,     laid them beneath the juniper tree,     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am Ion this the bird let the golden chain fall, and it fell exactlyround the man's neck, and so exactly round it that it fittedbeautifully.  Then he went in and said, "just look what a fine birdthat is, and what a handsome golden chain he has given me, and howpretty he is."  But the woman was terrified, and fell down onthe floor in the room, and her cap fell off her head.  Then sangthe bird once more -     my mother she killed me."Would that I were a thousand feet beneath the earth so as notto hear that."     My father he ate me,then the woman fell down again as if dead.     My sister, little marlinchen,"Ah," said Marlinchen, "I too will go out and see if the bird willgive me anything," and she went out.     Gathered together all my bones,     tied them in a silken handkerchief,then he threw down the shoes to her.     Laid them beneath the juniper tree,     kywitt, kywitt, what a beautiful bird am I.
Then she was light-hearted and joyous, and she put on the new redshoes, and danced and leaped into the house.  "Ah," said she, "Iwas so sad when I went out and now I am so light-hearted, thatis a splendid bird, he has given me a pair of red shoes."  "Well,"said the woman, and sprang to her feet and her hair stood uplike flames of fire, "I feel as if the world were coming to an end.I too, will go out and see if my heart feels lighter."  And asshe went out at the door, crash. The bird threw down the millstoneon her head, and she was entirely crushed by it.
The father and Marlinchen heard what had happened and went out, and smoke,flames, and fire were rising from the place, and when that wasover, there stood the little brother, and he took his father andMarlinchen by the hand, and all three were right glad, and theywent into the house to dinner, and ate.A farmer once had a faithful dog called sultan, who had grownold, and lost all his teeth, so that he could no longer hold onto anything.  One day the farmer was standing with his wife beforethe house-door, and said, to-morrow I intend to shoot old sultan,he is no longer of any use.
His wife, who felt pity for the faithful beast, answered, he hasserved us so long, and been so faithful, that we might well givehim his keep.
What, said the man, you are not very bright.  He has not a toothleft in his head, and not a thief is afraid of him, now he cango.  If he has served us, he has had good feeding for it.
The poor dog, who was lying stretched out in the sun not far off,had heard everything, and was sorry that the morrow was to be hislast day.  He had a good friend, the wolf, and he crept out inthe evening into the forest to him, and complained of the fatethat awaited him.  Listen, gossip, said the wolf, be of goodcheer, I will help you out of your trouble.  I have thought ofsomething.  To-morrow, early in the morning, your master isgoing with his wife to make hay, and they will take their littlechild with them, for no one will be left behind in the house.They are wont, during work-time, to lay the child under the hedgein the shade, you lay yourself there too, just as if you wishedto guard it.  Then I will come out of the wood, and carry offthe child.  You must rush swiftly after me, as if you wouldseize it again from me.  I will let it fall, and you will takeit back to its parents, who will think that you have saved it,and will be far too grateful to do you any harm, on the contrary,you will be in high favor, and they will never let you wantfor anything again.
The plan pleased the dog, and it was carried out just as it wasarranged.  The father screamed when he saw the wolf running acrossthe field with his child, but when old sultan brought it back,then he was full of joy, and stroked him and said, not a hairof yours shall be hurt, you shall eat my bread free as long asyou live.  And to his wife he said, go home at once and make oldsultan some bread-sop that he will not have to bite, and bring thepillow out of my bed, I will give him that to lie upon.
Henceforth old sultan was as well off as he could wish to be.Soon afterwards the wolf visited him, and was pleased thateverything had succeeded so well.  But, gossip, said he, you willjust wink an eye if, when I have a chance, I carry off one of yourmaster's fat sheep.  Do not reckon upon that, answered the dog,I will remain true to my master, I cannot agree to that.  Thewolf, who thought that this could not be spoken in earnest, camecreeping about in the night and was going to take away the sheep.But the farmer, to whom the faithful sultan had told the wolf'splan, caught him and dressed his hide soundly with the flail.The wolf had to make himself scarce, but he cried out to the dog,wait a bit, you scoundrel, you shall pay for this.
The next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge the dog tocome out into the forest so that they might settle the affair.Old sultan could find no one to stand by him but a cat with onlythree legs, and as they went out together the poor cat limpedalong, and at the same time stretched out her tail into the airwith pain.
The wolf and his friend were already at the appointed place, butwhen they saw their enemy coming they thought that he wasbringing a sabre with him, for they mistook the outstretched tailof the cat for one.  And when the poor beast hopped on its threelegs, they could only think every time that it was picking up astone to throw at them.  So they were both afraid, the wild boarcrept into the under-wood and the wolf jumped up a tree.
The dog and the cat, when they came up, wondered that there wasno one to be seen.  The wild boar, however, had not been able tohide himself altogether, one of his ears was sticking out.  Whilstthe cat was looking carefully about, the boar moved his ear, thecat, who thought it was a mouse moving there, jumped upon it andbit it hard.  The boar made a fearful noise and ran away,crying out, the guilty one is up in the tree.  The dog and catlooked up and saw the wolf, who was ashamed of having shown himselfso timid, and made friends with the dog.Once upon a time, a certain king was hunting in a great forest,and he chased a wild beast so eagerly that none of his attendantscould follow him.  When evening drew near he stopped and lookedaround him, and then he saw that he had lost his way.  Hesought a way out, but could find none.  Then he perceived an agedwoman with a head which nodded perpetually, who came towardshim, but she was a witch.  Good woman, said he to her, canyou not show me the way through the forest.  Oh, yes, lordking, she answered, that I certainly can, but on one condition,and if you do not fulfil that, you will never get out of theforest, and will die of hunger in it.
What kind of condition is it, asked the king.I have a daughter, said the old woman, who is as beautifulas anyone in the world, and well deserves to be your consort,and if you will make her your queen, I will show you the way outof the forest.  In the anguish of his heart the king consented,and the old woman led him to her little hut, where her daughterwas sitting by the fire.  She received the king as if she had beenexpecting him, and he saw that she was very beautiful, but stillshe did not please him, and he could not look at her withoutsecret horror.  After he had taken the maiden up on his horse,the old woman showed himthe way, and the king reached his royal palace again, where thewedding was celebrated.
The king had already been married once, and had by his firstwife, seven children, six boys and a girl, whom he lovedbetter than anything else in the world.  As he now feared thatthe stepmother might not treat them well, and even do them someinjury, he took them to a lonely castle which stood in themidst of a forest.  It lay so concealed, and the way was sodifficult to find that he himself would not have found it,if a wise woman had not given him a ball of yarn with wonderfulproperties.  When he threw it down before him, it unrolleditself and showed him his path.
The king, however, went sofrequently away to his dear children that the queen observedhis absence, she was curious and wanted to know what he didwhen he was quite alone in the forest.  She gave a great dealof money to his servants, and they betrayed the secret to her,and told her likewise of the ball which alone could point outthe way.  And now she knew no rest until she had learnt wherethe king kept the ball of yarn, and then she made little shirtsof white silk, and as she had learnt the art of witchcraft fromher mother, she sewed a charm inside them.  And once when theking had ridden forth to hunt, she took the little shirts andwent into the forest, and the ball showed her the way.
Thechildren, who saw from a distance that someone was approaching,thought that their dear father was coming to them, and full ofjoy, ran to meet him.  Then she threw one of the little shirtsover each of them, and no sooner had the shirts touched theirbodies than they were changed into swans, and flew away overthe forest.  The queen went home quite delighted, and thoughtshe had got rid of her step-children, but the girl had not runout with her brothers, and the queen knew nothing about her.
Next day the king went to visit his children, but he foundno one but the little girl.  Where are your brothers, askedthe king.  Alas, dear father, she answered, they have gone awayand left me alone, and she told him that she had seen fromher little window how her brothers had flown away over theforestin the shape of swans, and she showed him the feathers, whichthey had let fall in the courtyard, and which she had picked up.
The king mourned, but he did not think that the queen haddone this wicked deed, and as he feared that the girl wouldalso be stolen away from him, he wanted to take her away with him.But she was afraid of her step-mother, and entreated the kingto let her stay just this one night more in the forest castle.
The poor girl thought, I can no longer stay here.  I will goand seek my brothers.  And when night came, she ran away, andwent straight into the forest.  She walked the whole night long,and next day also without stopping, until she could go no fartherfor weariness.  Then she saw a forest-hut, and went into it, andfound a room with six little beds, but she did not venture toget into one of them, but crept under one, and lay down on thehard ground, intending to pass the night there.  Just beforesunset, however, she heard a rustling, and saw six swans comeflying in at the window.  They alighted on the ground and blewat each other, and blew all the feathers off, and their swans,skins stripped off like a shirt.  Then the maiden looked at themand recognized her brothers, was glad and crept forth from beneaththe bed.  The brothers were not less delighted to see theirlittle sister, but their joy was of short duration.  Here youcannot abide, they said to her.  This is a shelter for robbers,if they come home and find you, they will kill you.  But can younot protect me, asked the little sister.  No, they replied, onlyfor one quarter of an hour each evening can we lay aside ourswans, skins and have during that time our human form, afterthat, we are once more turned into swans.
The little sisterwept and said, can you not be set free.  Alas, no, they answered,the conditions are too hard.  For six years you may neitherspeak nor laugh, and in that time you must sew together sixlittle shirts of starwort for us.  And if one single word fallsfrom your lips, all your work will be lost.  And when the brothershad said this, the quarter of an hour was over, and they flewout of the window again as swans.
The maiden, however, firmly resolved to deliver her brothers, evenif it should cost her her life.  She left the hut, went intothe midst of the forest, seated herself on a tree, and therepassed the night.  Next morning she went out and gathered starwortand began to sew.  She could not speak to anyone, and she hadno inclination to laugh, she sat there and looked at nothingbut her work.
When she had already spent a long time there itcame to pass that the king of the country was hunting in theforest, and his huntsmen came to the tree on which the maidenwas sitting.  They called to her and said, who are you.  Butshe made no answer.  Come down to us, said they.  We will notdo you any harm.  She only shook her head.  As they pressed herfurther with questions she threw her golden necklace down tothem, and thought to content them thus.  They, however, didnot cease, and then she threw her girdle down to them, and asthis also was to no purpose, her garters, and by degreeseverything that she had on that she could do withoutuntil she had nothing left but her shift.
The huntsmen,however, did not let themselves be turned aside by that, butclimbed the tree and fetched the maiden down and led her beforethe king.  The king asked, who are you.  What are you doing on thetree.  But she did not answer.  He put the question in everylanguage that he knew, but she remained as mute as a fish.  Asshe was so beautiful, the king's heart was touched, and he wassmitten with a great love for her.  He put his mantle on her,took her before him on his horse, and carried her to hiscastle.  Then he caused her to be dressed in rich garments, andshe shone in her beauty like bright daylight, but no wordcould be drawn from her.  He placed her by his side at table, andher modest bearing and courtesy pleased him so much that he said,she is the one whom I wish to marry, and no other woman in theworld.  And after some days he united himself to her.
The king, however, had a wicked mother who was dissatisfiedwith this marriage and spoke ill of the young queen.  Who knows,said she, from whence the creature who can't speak, comes.She is not worthy of a king.  After a year had passed, whenthe queen brought her first child into the world, the oldwoman took it away from her, and smeared her mouth with bloodas she slept.  Then she went to the king and accused the queenof being a man-eater.  The king would not believe it, and wouldnot suffer anyone to do her any injury.  She, however, satcontinually sewing at the shirts, and cared for nothing else.
The next time, when she again bore a beautiful boy, the falsemother-in-law used the same treachery, but the king could notbring himself to give credit to her words.  He said, she istoo pious and good to do anything of that kind, if she were notdumb, and could defend herself, her innocence would come to light.
But when the old woman stole away the newly-born child for thethird time, and accused the queen, who did not utter one wordof defence, the king could do no otherwise than deliver her overto justice, and she was sentenced to suffer death by fire.
When the day came for the sentence to be carried out, it wasthe last day of the six years during which she was not to speakor laugh, and she had delivered her dear brothers from thepower of the enchantment.  The six shirts were ready, only theleft sleeve of the sixth was wanting.  When, therefore, she wasled to the stake, she laid the shirts on her arm, and when shestood on high and the fire was just going to be lighted, shelooked around and six swans came flying through the air towardsher.  Then she saw that her deliverance was near, and her heartleapt with joy.  The swans swept towards her and sank down so thatthey were touched by them, their swans, skins fell off, and herbrothers stood in their own bodily form before her, and werevigorous and handsome.  The youngest only lacked his left arm,and had in the place of it a swan's wing on his shoulder.  Theyembraced and kissed each other, and the queen went to the king,who was greatly moved, and she began to speak and said, dearesthusband, now I may speak and declare to you that I am innocent,and falsely accused.  And she told him of the treachery of theold woman who had taken away her three children and hidden them.
Then to the great joy of the king they were brought thither,and as a punishment, the wicked mother-in-law was bound tothe stake, and burnt to ashes.  But the king and the queen withher six brothers lived many years in happiness and peace.	Briar-Rose
A long time ago there were a king and queen who said everyday, ah, if only we had a child, but they never had one.  Butit happened that once when the queen was bathing, a frogcrept out of the water on to the land, and said to her, yourwish shall be fulfilled, before a year has gone by, you shallhave a daughter.
What the frog had said came true, and the queen had a littlegirl who was so pretty that the king could not contain himselffor joy, and ordered a great feast.  He invited not only hiskindred, friends and acquaintances, but also the wise women, inorder that they might be kind and well-disposed towards thechild.  There were thirteen of them in his kingdom, but, ashe had only twelve golden plates for them to eat out of, oneof them had to be left at home.
The feast was held with all manner of splendor and when itcame to an end the wise women bestowed their magic giftsupon the baby - one gave virtue, another beauty, a thirdriches, and so on with everything in the world that one canwish for.
When eleven of them had made their promises, suddenly thethirteenth came in.  She wished to avenge herself for nothaving been invited, and without greeting, or even lookingat anyone, she cried with a loud voice, the king's daughtershall in her fifteenth year prick herself with a spindle, and falldown dead.  And, without saying a word more, she turned roundand left the room.
They were all shocked, but the twelfth, whose good wish stillremained unspoken, came forward, and as she could not undothe evil sentence, but only soften it, she said, it shallnot be death, but a deep sleep of a hundred years, into whichthe princess shall fall.
The king, who would fain keep his dear child from the misfortune,gave orders that every spindle in the whole kingdom shouldbe burnt.  Meanwhile the gifts of the wise women were plenteouslyfulfilled on the young girl, for she was so beautiful, modest,good-natured, and wise, that everyone who saw her was boundto love her.
It happened that on the very day when she was fifteen yearsold, the king and queen were not at home, and the maidenwas left in the palace quite alone.  So she went round intoall sorts of places, looked into rooms and bed-chambers justas she liked, and at last came to an old tower.  She climbedup the narrow winding-staircase, and reached a little door.A rusty key was in the lock, and when she turned it the doorsprang open, and there in a little room sat an old woman witha spindle, busily spinning her flax.
Good day, old mother, said the king's daughter, what are youdoing there.  I am spinning, said the old woman, and noddedher head.  What sort of thing is that, that rattles roundso merrily, said the girl, and she took the spindle and wantedto spin too.  But scarcely had she touched the spindle when themagic decree was fulfilled, and she pricked her finger with it.
And, in the very moment when she felt the prick, she felldown upon the bed that stood there, and lay in a deep sleep.And this sleep extended over the whole palace, the king andqueen who had just come home, and had entered the great hall,began to go to sleep, and the whole of the court with them.The horses, too, went to sleep in the stable, the dogs inthe yard, the pigeons upon the roof, the flies on the wall,even the fire that was flaming on the hearth became quietand slept, the roast meat left off frizzling, and thecook, who was just going to pull the hair of the scullery boy,because he had forgotten something, let him go, and went tosleep.  And the wind fell, and on the trees before thecastle not a leaf moved again.
But round about the castle there began to grow a hedge ofthorns, which every year became higher, and at last grewclose up round the castle and all over it, so that therewas nothing of it to be seen, not even the flag upon theroof.  But the story of the beautiful sleeping briar-rose,for so the princess was named, went about the country,so that from time to time kings' sons came and tried toget through the thorny hedge into the castle.
But they found it impossible, for the thorns held fasttogether, as if they had hands, and the youths were caughtin them, could not get loose again, and died a miserabledeath.
After long, long years a king's son came again to thatcountry, and heard an old man talking about the thorn-hedge,and that a castle was said to stand behind it in which awonderfully beautiful princess, named briar-rose, had beenasleep for a hundred years, and that the king and queen andthe whole court were asleep likewise.  He had heard, too,from his grandfather, that many kings, sons had already come,and had tried to get through the thorny hedge, but they hadremained sticking fast in it, and had died a pitiful death.
Then the youth said, I am not afraid, I will go and seethe beautiful briar-rose.  The good old man might dissuade himas he would, he did not listen to his words.
But by this time the hundred years had just passed, and theday had come when briar-rose was to awake again.  When theking's son came near to the thorn-hedge, it was nothing butlarge and beautiful flowers, which parted from each other oftheir own accord, and let him pass unhurt, then they closedagain behind him like a hedge.  In the castle yard he saw thehorses and the spotted hounds lying asleep, on the roof satthe pigeons with their heads under their wings.  And when heentered the house, the flies were asleep upon the wall, thecook in the kitchen was still holding out his hand to seize theboy, and the maid was sitting by the black hen which shewas going to pluck.
He went on farther, and in the great hall he saw the whole ofthe court lying asleep, and up by the throne lay the king andqueen.
Then he went on still farther, and all was so quiet that a breathcould be heard, and at last he came to the tower, and opened thedoor into the little room where briar-rose was sleeping.
There she lay, so beautiful that he could not turn his eyes away,and he stooped down and gave her a kiss.  But as soon as hekissed her, briar-rose opened her eyes and awoke, and lookedat him quite sweetly.
Then they went down together, and the king awoke, and thequeen, and the whole court, and looked at each other ingreat astonishment.  And the horses in the courtyard stoodup and shook themselves, the hounds jumped up and wagged theirtails, the pigeons upon the roof pulled out their heads fromunder their wings, looked round, and flew into the opencountry, the flies on the wall crept again, the fire in thekitchen burned up and flickered and cooked the meat, the jointbegan to turn and sizzle again, and the cook gave the boy sucha box on the ear that he screamed, and the maid finishedplucking the fowl.
And then the marriage of the king's son with briar-rose wascelebrated with all splendor, and they lived contented to theend of their days.There was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt,and as he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if alittle child were there.  He followed the sound, and at lastcame to a high tree, and at the top of this a little child wassitting, for the mother had fallen asleep under the tree with thechild, and a bird of prey had seen it in her arms, had flown down,snatched it away, and set it on the high tree.
The forester climbed up, brought the child down, and thought tohimself, you will take him home with you, and bring him up withyour lina.  He took it home, therefore, and the two children grewup together.  And the one, which he had found on a tree was calledfundevogel, because a bird had carried it away.  Fundevogel andlina loved each other so dearly that when they did not see eachother they were sad.
Now the forester had an old cook, who one evening took two pailsand began to fetch water, and did not go once only, but many times,out to the spring.  Lina saw this and said, listen old sanna, whyare you fetching so much water.  If you will never repeat it toanyone, I will tell you why.  So lina said, no, she would neverrepeat it to anyone, and then the cook said, early tomorrowmorning, when the forester is out hunting, I will heat the water,and when it is boiling in the kettle, I will throw in fundevogel,and will boil him in it.
Early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting, andwhen he was gone the children were still in bed.  Then lina saidto fundevogel, if you will never leave me, I too will neverleave you.  Fundevogel said, neither now, nor ever will I leaveyou.  Then said lina, then I will tell you.  Last night, oldsanna carried so many buckets of water into the house that I askedher why she was doing that, and she said that if I would promisenot to tell anyone she would tell me, and I said I would besure not to tell anyone, and she said that early to-morrow morningwhen father was out hunting, she would set the kettle full ofwater, throw you into it and boil you, but we will get up quickly,dress ourselves, and go away together.
The two children therefore got up, dressed themselves quickly, andwent away.  When the water in the kettle was boiling, the cookwent into the bed-room to fetch fundevogel and throw him intoit.  But when she came in, and went to the beds, both the childrenwere gone.  Then she was terribly alarmed, and she said to herself,what shall I say now when the forester comes home and sees thatthe children are gone.  They must be followed instantly to getthem back again.
Then the cook sent three servants after them, who were to run andovertake the children.  The children, however, were sittingoutside the forest, and when they saw from afar the three servantsrunning, lina said to fundevoel, never leave me, and I will neverleave you.  Fundevogel said, neither now, nor ever.  Then saidlina, do you become a rose-tree, and I the rose upon it.  Whenthe three servants came to the forest, nothing was there but arose-tree and one rose on it, but the children were nowhere.
Then said they, there is nothing to be done here, and they wenthome and told the cook that they had seen nothing in the forestbut a little rose-bush with one rose on it.  Then the old cookscolded and said, you simpletons, you simpletons, you should havecut the rose-bush in two, and have broken off the rose and broughtit home with you, go, and do it once.  They had therefore to goout and look for the second time.  The children, however, saw themcoming from a distance.  Then lina said, fundevogel, never leaveme, and I will never leave you.  Fundevogel said, neither now,nor ever.  Said lina, then do you become a church, and I'll bethe chandelier in it.  So when the three servants came,nothing was there but a church, with a chandelier in it.  Theysaid therefore to each other, what can we do here, let us go home.
When they got home, the cook asked if they had not found them, sothey said no, they had found nothing but a church, and thatthere was a chandelier in it.  And the cook scolded them and said,you fools, why did you not pull the church to pieces, and bringthe chandelier home with you.  And now the old cook herself goton her legs, and went with the three servants in pursuit of thechildren.  The children, however, saw from afar that the threeservants were coming, and the cook waddling after them.  Thensaid lina, fundevogel, never leave me, and I will never leaveyou.  Then said fundevogel, neither now, nor ever.  Said lina,be a fishpond, and I will be the duck upon it.  The cook,however, came up to them, and when she saw the pond she laydown by it, and was about to drink it up.  But the duck swamquickly to her, seized her head in its beak and drew her into thewater, and there the old witch had to drown.  Then thechildren went home together, and were heartily delighted, andif they have not died, they are living still.A king had a daughter who was beautiful beyond all measure,but so proud and haughty withal that no suitor was goodenough for her.  She sent away one after the other, andridiculed them as well.
Once the king made a great feast and invited thereto, from farand near, all the young men likely to marry.  They were allmarshalled in a row according to their rank and standing.  Firstcame the kings, then the grand-dukes, then the princes, theearls, the barons, and the gentry.  Then the king's daughter wasled through the ranks, but to each one she had some objectionto make.  One was too fat, the wine-barrel, she said.  Anotherwas too tall, long and thin has little in.  The third was tooshort, short and thick is never quick.  The fourth was toopale, as pale as death.  The fifth too red, a fighting cock.The sixth was not straight enough, a green log dried behindthe stove.
So she had something to say against each one, but she madeherself especially merry over a good king who stood quitehigh up in the row, and whose chin had grown a little crooked.Look, she cried and laughed, he has a chin like a thrush'sbeak. And from that time he got the name of king thrushbeard.
But the old king, when he saw that his daugher did nothingbut mock the people, and despised all the suitors who weregathered there, was very angry, and swore that she should havefor her husband the very first beggar that came to his doors.
A few days afterwards a fiddler came and sang beneath thewindows, trying to earn a few pennies.  When the king heard himhe said, let him come up.  So the fiddler came in, in his dirty,ragged clothes, and sang before the king and his daughter, andwhen he had ended he asked for a trifling gift.  The king said,your song has pleased me so well that I will give you mydaughter there, to wife.
The king's daughter shuddered, but the king said, I have takenan oath to give you to the very first beggar-man and I will keepit.  All she could say was in vain.  The priest was brought,and she had to let herself be wedded to the fiddler on thespot.  When that was done the king said, now it is not properfor you, a beggar-woman, to stay any longer in my palace, you mayjust go away with your husband.
The beggar-man led her out by the hand, and she was obliged towalk away on foot with him.  When they came to a large forestshe asked, to whom does that beautiful forest belong.  Itbelongs to king thrushbeard.  If you had taken him, it wouldhave been yours.  Ah, unhappy girl that I am, if I had but takenking thrushbeard.
Afterwards they came to a meadow, and she asked again, to whomdoes this beautiful green meadow belong.  It belongs to kingthrushbeard.  If you had taken him, it would have beenyours.  Ah, unhappy girl that I am, if I had but taken kingthrushbeard.
Then they came to a large town, and she asked again, to whomdoes this fine large town belong.  It belongs to king thrushbeard.If you had taken him, it would have been yours.  Ah, unhappygirl that I am, if I had but taken king thrushbeard.It does not please me, said the fiddler, to hear you alwayswishing for another husband.  Am I not good enough for you.
At last they came to a very little hut, and she said, ohgoodness.  What a small house.  To whom does this miserable,tiny hovel belong.  The fiddler answered, that is my house andyours, where we shall live together.
She had to stoop in order to go in at the low door.  Where arethe servants, said the king's daughter.  What servants, answeredthe beggar-man.  You must yourself do what you wish to have done.Just make a fire at once, and set on water to cook my supper,I am quite tired.  But the king's daughter knew nothing aboutlighting fires or cooking, and the beggar-man had to lend ahand himself to get anything fairly done.  When they hadfinished their scanty meal they went to bed.  But he forcedher to get up quite early in the morning in order to look afterthe house.
For a few days they lived in this way as well as might be, andcame to the end of all their provisions.  Then the man said,wife, we cannot go on any longer eating and drinking here andearning nothing.  You must make baskets.  He went out, cut somewillows, and brought them home.  Then she began to make baskets,but the tough willows wounded her delicate hands.
I see that this will not do, said the man.  You had better spin,perhaps you can do that better.  She sat down and tried to spin,but the hard thread soon cut her soft fingers so that the bloodran down.  See, said the man, you are fit for no sort of work.I have made a bad bargain with you.  Now I will try to make abusiness with pots and earthenware.  You must sit in themarket-place and sell the ware.  Alas, thought she, if any ofthe people from my father's kingdom come to the market and seeme sitting there, selling, how they will mock me.  But it wasof no use, she had to yield unless she chose to die of hunger.For the first time she succeeded well, for the people were gladto buy the woman's wares because she was good-looking, andthey paid her what she asked.  Many even gave her the money andleft the pots with her as well.  So they lived on what she hadearned as long as it lasted, then the husband bought a lot ofnew crockery.  With this she sat down at the corner of themarket-place, and set it out round about her ready for sale.But suddenly there came a drunken hussar galloping along, andhe rode right amongst the pots so that they were all broken intoa thousand bits.  She beganto weep, and did now know what to do for fear.  Alas, what willhappen to me, cried she.  What will my husband say to this.She ran home and told him of the misfortune.  Who would seatherself at a corner of the market-place with crockery, saidthe man.  Leave off crying, I see very well that you cannotdo any ordinary work, so I have been to our king's palace andhave asked whether they cannot find a place for a kitchen-maid,and they have promised me to take you.  In that way you willget your food for nothing.
The king's daughter was now a kitchen-maid, and had to be atthe cook's beck and call, and do the dirtiest work.  In both herpockets she fastened a little jar, in which she took home hershare of the leavings, and upon this they lived.
It happened that the wedding of the king's eldest son was to becelebrated, so the poor woman went up and placed herself bythe door of the hall to look on.  When all the candles were lit,and people, each more beautiful than the other, entered, andall was full of pomp and splendor, she thought of her lot witha sad heart, and cursed the pride and haughtiness which hadhumbled her and brought her to so great poverty.
The smell of the delicious dishes which were being taken inand out reached her, and now and then the servants threw hera few morsels of them.  These she put in her jars to take home.
All at once the king's son entered, clothed in velvet and silk,with gold chains about his neck.  And when he saw thebeautiful woman standing by the door he seized her by the hand,and would have danced with her.  But she refused and shrankwith fear, for she saw that it was king thrushbeard, hersuitor whom she had driven away with scorn.  Her struggleswere of no avail, he drew her into the hall.  But the stringby which her pockets were hung broke, the pots fell down, thesoup ran out, and the scraps were scattered all about.  Andwhen the people saw it, there arose general laughter andderision, and she was so ashamed that she would rather havebeen a thousand fathoms below the ground.  She sprang to thedoor and would have run away, but on the stairs a man caughther and brought her back.  And when she looked at him it wasking thrushbeard again.  He said to her kindly, do not beafraid, I and the fiddler who has been living with you in thatwretched hovel are one.  For love of you I disguised myselfso.  And I also was the hussar who rode through your crockery.This was all done to humble your proud spirit, and to punishyou for the insolence with which you mocked me.
Then she wept bitterly and said, I have done great wrong, andam not worthy to be your wife.  But he said, be comforted,the evil days are past.  Now we will celebrate our wedding.Then the maids-in-waiting came and put on her the most splendidclothing, and her father and his whole court came and wishedher happiness in her marriage with king thrushbeard, andthe joy now began in earnest.  I wish you and I had been theretoo.	Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs
Once upon a time in the middle of winter, when the flakes ofsnow were falling like feathers from the sky, a queen sat ata window sewing, and the frame of the window was made of blackebony.  And whilst she was sewing and looking out of the windowat the snow, she pricked her finger with the needle, and threedrops of blood fell upon the snow.  And the red looked prettyupon the white snow, and she thought to herself, would that I hada child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as thewood of the window-frame.
Soon after that she had a little daughter, who was as white assnow, and as red as blood, and her hair was as black as ebony,and she was therefore called little snow-white.  And when thechild was born, the queen died.
After a year had passed the king took to himself another wife.She was a beautiful woman, but proud and haughty, and she couldnot bear that anyone else chould surpass her in beauty.  Shehad a wonderful looking-glass, and when she stood in front of itand looked at herself in it, and said,          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,          who in this land is the fairest of all.
The looking-glass answered,          thou, o queen, art the fairest of all.
Then she was satisfied, for she knew that the looking-glass spokethe truth.
But snow-white was growing up, and grew more and more beautiful,and when she was seven years old she was as beautiful as the day,and more beautiful than the queen herself.  And once when thequeen asked her looking-glass,          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,          who in this land is the fairest of all.
It answered,          thou art fairer than all who are here, lady queen.          But more beautiful still is snow-white, as I ween.
Then the queen was shocked, and turned yellow and green withenvy.  From that hour, whenever she looked at snow-white, herheart heaved in her breast, she hated the girl so much.And envy and pride grew higher and higher in her heart like aweed, so that she had no peace day or night.  She called ahuntsman, and said, take the child away into the forest.  I willno longer have her in my sight.  Kill her, and bring me back herlung and liver as a token.  The huntsman obeyed, and took her awaybut when he had drawn his knife, and was about to piercesnow-white's innocent heart, she began to weep, and said, ah dearhuntsman, leave me my life.  I will run away into the wild forest,and never come home again.
And as she was so beautiful the huntsman had pity on her andsaid, run away, then, you poor child.  The wild beasts will soonhave devoured you, thought he, and yet it seemed as if a stone hadbeen rolled from his heart since it was no longer needful forhim to kill her.  And as a young bear just then came running byhe stabbed it, and cut out its lung and liver and took them to thequeen as proof that the child was dead.  The cook had to salt them,and the wicked queen ate them, and thought she had eaten the lungand liver of snow-white.
But now the poor child was all alone in the great forest, and soterrified that she looked at all the leaves on the trees, and didnot know what to do.  Then she began to run, and ran over sharpstones and through thorns, and the wild beasts ran past her, butdid her no harm.
She ran as long as her feet would go until it was almost evening,then she saw a little cottage and went into it to rest herself.Everything in the cottage was small, but neater and cleaner thancan be told.  There was a table on which was a white cover, andseven little plates, and on each plate a little spoon, moreover,there were seven little knives and forks, and seven little mugs.Against the wall stood seven little beds side by side, andcovered with snow-white counterpanes.
Little snow-white was so hungry and thirsty that she ate somevegetables and bread from each plate and drank a drop of wineout of each mug, for she did not wish to take all from one only.Then, as she was so tired, she laid herself down on one of thelittle beds, but none of them suited her, one was too long,another too short, but at last she found that the seventh one wasright, and so she remained in it, said a prayer and went tosleep.
When it was quite dark the owners of the cottage came back.They were seven dwarfs who dug and delved in the mountains forore.  They lit their seven candles, and as it was now light withinthe cottage they saw that someone had been there, for everythingwas not in the same order in which they had left it.
The first said, who has been sitting on my chair.The second, who has been eating off my plate.The third, who has been taking some of my bread.The fourth, who has been eating my vegetables.The fifth, who has been using my fork.The sixth, who has been cutting with my knife.The seventh, who has been drinking out of my mug.
Then the first looked round and saw that there was a littlehollow on his bed, and he said, who has been getting into mybed.  The others came up and each called out, somebody has beenlying in my bed too.  But the seventh when he looked at his bedsaw little snow-white, who was lying asleep therein.  And hecalled the others, who came running up, and they cried out withastonishment, and brought their seven little candles and let thelight fall on little snow-white.  Oh, heavens, oh, heavens, criedthey, what a lovely child.  And they were so glad that they didnot wake her up, but let her sleep on in the bed.  And theseventh dwarf slept with his companions, one hour with each, andso passed the night.
When it was morning little snow-white awoke, and was frightenedwhen she saw the seven dwarfs.  But they were friendly and askedher what her name was.  My name is snow-white, she answered.How have you come to our house, said the dwarfs.  Then she toldthem that her step-mother had wished to have her killed, butthat the huntsman had spared her life, and that she had run forthe whole day, until at last she had found their dwelling.
The dwarfs said, if you will take care of our house, cook, makethe beds, wash, sew and knit, and if you will keep everything neatand clean you can stay with us and you shall want for nothing.Yes, said snow-white, with all my heart.  And she stayed withthem.  She kept the house in order for them.  In the morningsthey went to the mountains and looked for copper and gold, in theevenings they came back, and then their supper had to be ready.The girl was alone the whole day, so the good dwarfs warned herand said, beware of your step-mother, she will soon know that youare here, be sure to let no one come in.
But the queen, believing that she had eaten snow-white's lung andliver, could not but think that she was again the first and mostbeautiful of all, and she went to her looking-glass and said,looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,          who in this land is the fairest of all.
And the glass answered,          oh, queen, thou art fairest of all I see,          but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,          snow-white is still alive and well,          and none is so fair as she.
Then she was astounded, for she knew that the looking-glassnever spoke falsely, and she knew that the huntsman had betrayedher, and that little snow-white was still alive.
And so she thought and thought again how she might kill her,for so long as she was not the fairest in the whole land, envy lether have no rest.  And when she had at last thought of somethingto do, she painted her face, and dressed herself like an oldpedlar-woman, and no one could have known her.  In this disguiseshe went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, andknocked at the door and cried, pretty things to sell, very cheap,very cheap.  Little snow-white looked out of the window and calledout, good-day my good woman, what have you to sell.  Good things,pretty things, she answered, stay-laces of all colors, and shepulled out one which was woven of bright-colored silk.  I may letthe worthy old woman in, thought snow-white, and she unbolted thedoor and bought the pretty laces.  Child, said the old woman,what a fright you look, come, I will lace you properly for once.Snow-white had no suspicion, but stood before her, and let herselfbe laced with the new laces.  But the old woman laced so quicklyand so tightly that snow-white lost her breath and fell down asif dead.  Now I am the most beautiful, said the queen to herself,and ran away.
Not long afterwards, in the evening, the seven dwarfs came home,but how shocked they were when they saw their dear little snow-whitelying on the ground, and that she neither stirred normoved, and seemed to be dead.  They lifted her up, and, as theysaw that she was laced too tightly, they cut the laces, then shebegan to breathe a little, and after a while came to life again.When the dwarfs heard what had happened they said, the oldpedlar-woman was no oneelse than the wicked queen, take care and let no one come inwhen we are not with you.
But the wicked woman when she had reached home went in frontof the glass and asked,          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,          who in this land is the fairest of all.
And it answered as before,          oh, queen, thou art fairest of all I see,          but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,          snow-white is still alive and well,          and none is so fair as she.
When she heard that, all her blood rushed to her heart with fear,for she saw plainly that little snow-white was again alive.But now, she said, I will think of something that shall reallyput an end to you.  And by the help of witchcraft, which sheunderstood, she made a poisonous comb.  Then she disguisedherself and took the shape of another old woman.  So she wentover the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked at thedoor, and cried, good things to sell, cheap, cheap.  Littlesnow-white looked out and said, go away, I cannot let anyone comein.  I suppose you can look, said the old woman, and pulled thepoisonous comb out and held it up.  It pleased the girl so wellthat she let herself be beguiled, and opened the door.  When theyhad made a bargain the old woman said, now I will comb youproperly for once.  Poor little snow-white had no suspicion, andlet the old woman do as she pleased, but hardly had she put thecomb in her hair than the poison in it took effect, and the girlfell down senseless.  You paragon of beauty, said the wickedwoman, you are done for now, and she went away.
But fortunately it was almost evening, when the seven dwarfscame home.  When they saw snow-white lying as if dead upon theground they at once suspected the step-mother, and they lookedand found the poisoned comb.  Scarcely had they taken it out whensnow-white came to herself, and told them what had happened.Then they warned her once more to be upon her guard and to openthe door to no one.
The queen, at home, went in front of the glass and said,          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,          who in this land is the fairest of all.
Then it answered as before,          oh, queen, thou art fairest of all I see,          but over the hills, where the seven dwarfs dwell,          snow-white is still alive and well,          and none is so fair as she.
When she heard the glass speak thus she trembled and shookwith rage.  Snow-white shall die, she cried, even if it costs memy life.
Thereupon she went into a quite secret, lonely room, where noone ever came, and there she made a very poisonous apple.Outside it looked pretty, white with a red cheek, so thateveryone who saw it longed for it, but whoever ate a piece of itmust surely die.
When the apple was ready she painted her face, and dressed herselfup as a farmer's wife, and so she went over the sevenmountains to the seven dwarfs.  She knocked at the door.  Snow-whiteput her head out of the window and said, I cannot letanyone in, the seven dwarfs have forbidden me.  It is all thesame to me, answered the woman, I shall soon get rid of my apples.There, I will give you one.
No, said snow-white, I dare not take anything.  Are you afraidof poison, said the old woman, look, I will cut the apple in twopieces, you eat the red cheek, and I will eat the white.  Theapple was so cunningly made that only the red cheek waspoisoned.  Snow-white longed for the fine apple, and when she sawthat the woman ate part of it she could resist no longer, andstretched outher hand and took the poisonous half.  But hardly had she a bitof it in her mouth than she fell down dead.  Then the queenlooked at her with a dreadful look, and laughed aloud and said,white as snow, red as blood, black as ebony-wood, this time thedwarfs cannot wake you up again.
And when she asked of the looking-glass at home,          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,          who in this land is the fairest of all.
And it answered at last,          oh, queen, in this land thou art fairest of all.Then her envious heart had rest, so far as an envious heart canhave rest.
The dwarfs, when they came home in the evening, found snow-whitelying upon the ground, she breathed no longer and was dead.They lifted her up, looked to see whether they could findanything poisonous, unlaced her, combed her hair, washed herwith water and wine, but it was all of no use, the poor child wasdead, and remained dead.  They laid her upon a bier, and allseven of them sat round it and wept for her, and wept three dayslong.
Then they were going to bury her, but she still looked as if shewere living, and still had her pretty red cheeks.  They said,we could not bury her in the dark ground, and they had atransparent coffin of glass made, so that she could be seen fromall sides, and they laid her in it, and wrote her name upon itin golden letters, and that she was a king's daughter.  Then theyput the coffin out upon the mountain, and one of them alwaysstayed by it and watched it.  And birds came too, and wept forsnow-white, first an owl, then a raven, and last a dove.
And now snow-white lay a long, long time in the coffin, and shedid not change, but looked as if she were asleep, for she was aswhite as snow, as red as blood, and her hair was as black asebony.
It happened, however, that a king's son came into the forest, andwent to the dwarfs, house to spend the night.  He saw the coffinon the mountain, and the beautiful snow-white within it, and readwhat was written upon it in golden letters.  Then he said to thedwarfs, let me have the coffin, I will give you whatever you wantfor it.  But the dwarfs answered, we will not part with it for allthe gold in the world.  Then he said, let me have it as a gift, forI cannot live without seeing snow-white.  I will honor and prizeher as my dearest possession.  As he spoke in this way the gooddwarfs took pity upon him, and gave him the coffin.
And now the king's son had it carried away by his servants ontheir shoulders.  And it happened that they stumbled over atree-stump, and with the shock the poisonous piece of applewhich snow-white had bitten off came out of her throat.  Andbefore long she opened her eyes, lifted up the lid of the coffin,sat up, and wasonce more alive.  Oh, heavens, where am I, she cried.  The king'sson, full of joy, said, you are with me.  And told her what hadhappened, and said, I love you more than everything in theworld, come with me to my father's palace, you shall be my wife.
And snow-white was willing, and went with him, and their weddingwas held with great show and splendor.  But snow-white'swicked step-mother was also bidden to the feast.  When she hadarrayed herself in beautiful clothes she went before thelooking-glass, and said,          looking-glass, looking-glass, on the wall,          who in this land is the fairest of all.
The glass answered,          oh, queen, of all here the fairest art thou,          but the young queen is fairer by far as I trow.
Then the wicked woman uttered a curse, and was so wretched,so utterly wretched that she knew not what to do.  At first shewould not go to the wedding at all, but she had no peace, andhad to go to see the young queen.  And when she went in sherecognized snow-white, and she stood still with rage and fear,and could not stir.  But iron slippers had already been put uponthe fire, and they were brought in with tongs, and set beforeher.  Then she was forced to put on the red-hot shoes, and danceuntil she dropped down dead.There were once three brothers who had fallen deeper and deeper intopoverty, and at last their need was so great that they had to endurehunger, and had nothing to eat or drink. Then said they, it cannot goon like this, we had better go into the world and seek our fortune.They therefore set out, and had already walked over many a long roadand many a blade of grass, but had not yet met with good luck.  Oneday they arrived in a great forest, and in the midst of it was ahill, and when they came nearer they saw that the hill was allsilver.  Then spoke the eldest, now I have found the good luck Iwished for, and I desire nothing more.  He took as much of the silveras he could possibly carry, and then turned back and went home again.
But the two others said, we want something more from good luck thanmere silver, and did not touch it, but went onwards.  After they hadwalked for two days longer without stopping, they came to a hillwhich was all gold. The second brother stopped, took thought withhimself, and was undecided.  What shall I do, said he, shall I takefor myself so much of this gold, that I have sufficient for all therest of my life, or shall I go farther.  At length he made adecision, and putting as much into his pockets as would go in, saidfarewell to his brother, and went home.
But the third said, silver and gold do not move me, I will notrenounce my chance of fortune, perhaps something better still will begiven me.  He journeyed onwards, and when he had walked for threedays, he came to a forest which was still larger than the one before,and never would come to an end, and as he found nothing to eat or todrink, he was all but exhausted.  Then he climbed up a high tree tofind out if up there he could see the end of the forest, but so faras his eye could pierce he saw nothing but the tops of trees.  Thenhe began to descend the tree again, but hunger tormented him, and hethought to himself, if I could but eat my fill once more.
When he got down he saw with astonishment a table beneath the treerichly spread with food, the steam of which rose up to meet him.This time, said he, my wish has been fulfilled at the right moment.And without inquiring who had brought the food, or who had cooked it,he approached the table, and ate with enjoyment until he had appeasedhis hunger.  When he was done, he thought, it would after all be apity if the pretty little table-cloth were to be spoilt in the foresthere, and folded it up tidily and put it in his pocket.  Then he wentonwards, and in the evening, when hunger once more returned to him,he wanted to make a trial of his little cloth, and spread it out andsaid, I wish you to be covered with good cheer again, and scarcelyhad the wish crossed his lips than as many dishes with the mostexquisite food on them stood on the table as there was room for.  NowI perceive, said he, in what kitchen my cooking is done.  You shallbe dearer to me than the mountains of silver and gold.  For he sawplainly that it was a wishing-cloth. The cloth, however, was stillnot enough to enable him to sit down quietly at home, he preferred towander about the world and pursue his fortune farther.
One night he met, in a lonely wood, a dusty, black charcoal-burner,who was burning charcoal there, and had some potatoes by the fire, onwhich he was going to make a meal.  Good evening, blackbird, said theyouth.  How do you get on in your solitude.
One day is like another, replied the charcoal-burner, and every nightpotatoes.  Have you a mind to have some, and will you be my guest.Many thanks, replied the traveler, I won't rob you of your supper,you did not reckon on a visitor, but if you will put up with what Ihave, you shall have an invitation. Who is to prepare it for you,said the charcoal-burner.  I see that you have nothing with you, andthere is no one within a two hours' walk who could give you anything.And yet there shall be a meal, answered the youth, and better thanany you have ever tasted.  Thereupon he brought his cloth out of hisknapsack, spread it on the ground, and said, little cloth, coveryourself, and instantly boiled meat and baked meat stood there, andas hot as if it had just come out of the kitchen.
The charcoal-burner stared with wide-open eyes, but did not requiremuch pressing, he fell to, and thrust larger and larger mouthfulsinto his black mouth.  When they had eaten everything, thecharcoal-burner smiled contentedly, and said, listen, yourtable-cloth has my approval, it would be a fine thing for me in thisforest, where no one ever cooks me anything good.  I will propose anexchange to you, there in the corner hangs a soldier's knapsack,which is certainly old and shabby, but in it lie concealed wonderfulpowers, but, as I no longer use it, I will give it to you for thetable-cloth.
I must first know what these wonderful powers are, answered theyouth.
That will I tell you, replied the charcoal-burner, every time you tapit with your hand, a corporal comes with six men armed from head tofoot, and they do whatsover you command them.  So far as I amconcerned, said the youth, if nothing else can be done, we willexchange, and he gave the charcoal-burner the cloth, took theknapsack from the hook, put it on, and bade farewell.  When he hadwalked a while, he wished to make a trial of the magical powers ofhis knapsack and tapped it.  Immediately the seven warriors steppedup to him, and the corporal said, what does my lord and ruler wishfor.
March with all speed to the charcoal-burner, and demand mywishing-cloth back.  They faced to the left, and it was not longbefore they brought what he required, and had taken it from thecharcoal-burner without asking many questions.  The young man badethem retire, went onwards, and hoped fortune would shine yet morebrightly on him.  By sunset he came to another charcoal-burner, whowas making his supper ready by the fire. If you will eat somepotatoes with salt, but with no dripping, come and sit down with me,said the sooty fellow.
No, he replied, this time you shall be my guest, and he spread outhis cloth, which was instantly covered with the most beautifuldishes.  They ate and drank together, and enjoyed themselvesheartily.  After the meal was over, the charcoal-burner said, upthere on that shelf lies a little old worn-out hat which has strangeproperties - the moment someone puts it on, and turns it round on hishead, the cannons go off as if twelve were fired all together, andthey demolish everything so that no one can withstand them.  The hatis of no use to me, and I will willingly give it for your tablecloth.
That suits me very well, he answered, took the hat, put it on, andleft his table-cloth behind him.  But hardly had he walked away thanhe tapped on his knapsack, and his soldiers had to fetch the clothback again.  One thing comes on the top of another, thought he, and Ifeel as if my luck had not yet come to an end.  Neither had histhoughts deceived him.  After he had walked on for the whole of oneday, he came to a third charcoal-burner, who like the previous one,invited him to potatoes without dripping.  But he let him also dinewith him from his wishing-cloth, and the charcoal-burner liked it sowell, that at last he offered him a horn for it, which had verydifferent properties from those of the hat.  The moment someone blewit all the walls and fortifications fell down, and all towns andvillages became ruins.  For this he immediately gave thecharcoal-burner the cloth, but he afterwards sent his soldiers todemand it back again, so that at length he had the knapsack, hat andhorn, all three.  Now, said he, I am a made man, and it is time forme to go home and see how my brothers are getting on.
When he reached home, his brothers had built themselves a handsomehouse with their silver and gold, and were living in clover. He wentto see them, but as he came in a ragged coat, with his shabby hat onhis head, and his old knapsack on his back, they would notacknowledge him as their brother.  They mocked and said, you give outthat you are our brother who despised silver and gold, and craved forsomething still better for himself.  Such a person arrives in hiscarriage in full splendor like a mighty king, not like a beggar, andthey drove him out of doors.  Then he fell into a rage, and tappedhis knapsack until a hundred and fifty men stood before him armedfrom head to foot.  He commanded them to surround his brothers,house, and two of them were to take hazelsticks with them, and beatthe two insolent men until they knew who he was.
A violent disturbance broke out, people ran together, and wanted tolend the two some help in their need, but against the soldiers theycould do nothing.  News of this at length came to the king, who wasvery angry, and ordered a captain to march out with his troop, anddrive this disturber of the peace out of the town, but the man withknapsack soon got a greater body of men together, who repulsed thecaptain and his men, so that they were forced to retire with bloodynoses.  The king said, this vagabond is not brought to order yet, andnext day sent a still larger troop against him, but they could doeven less.  The youth set still more men against them, and in orderto be done the sooner, he turned his hat twice round on his head, andheavy guns began to play, and the king's men were beaten and put toflight.
And now, said he, I will not make peace until the king gives me hisdaughter to wife, and I govern the whole kingdom in his name.  Hecaused this to be announced to the king, and the latter said to hisdaughter, necessity is a hard nut to crack.  What else is there forme to do but what he desires.  If I want peace and to keep the crownon my head, I must give you away.
So the wedding was celebrated, but the king's daughter was vexed thather husband should be a common man, who wore a shabby hat, and put onan old knapsack.  She longed to get rid of him, and night and daystudied how she could accomplished this.  Then she thought toherself, is it possible that his wonderful powers lie in theknapsack, and she feigned affection and caressed him, and when hisheart was softened, she said, if you would but lay aside that horridknapsack, it makes you look so ugly, that I can't help being ashamedof you.  Dear child, said he, this knapsack is my greatest treasure,as long as I have it, there is no power on earth that I am afraid of.And he revealed to her the wonderful virtue with which it wasendowed.
Then she threw herself in his arms as if she were going to kiss him,but cleverly took the knapsack off his shoulders, and ran away withit.  As soon as she was alone she tapped it, and commanded thewarriors to seize their former master, and take him out of the royalpalace.  They obeyed, and the false wife sent still more men afterhim, who were to drive him quite out of the country.  Then he wouldhave been ruined if he had not had the little hat.  And hardly werehis hands free before he turned it twice.  Immediately the cannonbegan to thunder, and demolished everything, and the king's daughterherself was forced to come and beg for mercy.  As she entreated insuch moving terms, and promised to better her ways, he allowedhimself to be persuaded and granted her peace.
She behaved in a friendly manner to him, and acted as if she lovedhim very much, and after some time managed so to befool him, that heconfided to her that even if someone got the knapsack into his power,he could do nothing against him so long as the old hat was still his.When she knew the secret, she waited until he was asleep, and thenshe took the hat away from him, and had it thrown out into thestreet.  But the horn still remained to him, and in great anger heblew it with all his strength.
Instantly all walls, fortifications, towns, and villages, toppleddown, and crushed the king and his daughter to death. And had he notput down the horn and had blown just a little longer, everythingwould have been in ruins, and not one stone would have been leftstanding on another.  Then no one opposed him any longer, and he madehimself king of the whole country.	Rumpelstiltskin
Once there was a miller who was poor, but who had a beautifuldaughter.  Now it happened that he had to go and speak to theking, and in order to make himself appear important he saidto him, I have a daughter who can spin straw into gold.  Theking said to the miller, that is an art whichpleases me well, if your daughter is as clever as you say, bringher to-morrow to my palace, and I will put her to the test.
And when the girl was brought to him he took her into a roomwhich was quite full of straw, gave her a spinning-wheel and areel, and said, now set to work, and if by to-morrow morningearly you have not spun this straw into gold during the night,you must die.  Thereupon he himself locked up the room, andleft her in it alone.  So there sat the poor miller's daughter,and for the life of her could not tell what to do, she had noidea how straw could be spun into gold, and she grew more andmore frightened, until at last she began to weep.
But all at once the door opened, and in came a little man,and said, good evening, mistress miller, why are you crying so.Alas, answered the girl, I have to spin straw into gold, and I donot know how to do it.  What will you give me, said themanikin, if I do it for you.  My necklace, said the girl.  Thelittle man took the necklace, seated himself in front of thewheel, and whirr, whirr, whirr, three turns, and the reel wasfull, then he put another on, and whirr, whirr, whirr, three timesround, and the second was full too.  And so it went on untilthe morning, when all the straw was spun, and all the reelswere full of gold.
By daybreak the king was already there, andwhen he saw the gold he was astonished and delighted, but hisheart became only more greedy.  He had the miller's daughtertaken into another room full of straw, which was much larger,and commanded her to spin that also in one night if she valuedher life.  The girl knew not how to help herself, and wascrying, when the door opened again, and the little man appeared,and said, what will you give me if I spin that straw into goldfor you.  The ring on my finger, answered the girl.  The littleman took the ring, again began to turn the wheel, and bymorning had spun all the straw into glittering gold.
The king rejoiced beyond measure at the sight, but still he hadnot gold enough, and he had the miller's daughter taken intoa still larger room full of straw, and said, you must spin this,too, in the course of this night, but if you succeed, you shallbe my wife.
Even if she be a miller's daughter, thought he, I could notfind a richer wife in the whole world.
When the girl was alone the manikin came again for the thirdtime, and said, what will you give me if I spin the straw foryou this time also.  I have nothing left that I could give,answered the girl.  Then promise me, if you should become queen,to give me your first child.  Who knows whether that willever happen, thought the miller's daughter, and, not knowinghow else to help herself in this strait, she promised themanikin what he wanted, and for that he once more spun thestraw into gold.
And when the king came in the morning, and found all as hehad wished, he took her in marriage, and the pretty miller'sdaughter became a queen.
A year after, she brought a beautiful child into the world,and she never gave a thought to the manikin.  But suddenly hecame into her room, and said, now give me what you promised.
The queen was horror-struck, and offered the manikin all theriches of the kingdom if he would leave her the child.  But themanikin said, no, something alive is dearer to me than all thetreasures in the world.  Then the queen began to lament and cry,so that the manikin pitied her.  I will give you three days,time, said he, if by that time you find out my name, then shallyou keep your child.
So the queen thought the whole night of all the names thatshe had ever heard, and she sent a messenger over the country toinquire, far and wide, for any other names that there might be.When the manikin came the next day, she began with caspar,melchior, balthazar, and said all the names she knew, oneafter another, but to every one the little man said, that is notmy name.  On the second day she had inquiries made in theneighborhood as to the names of the people there, and sherepeated to the manikin the most uncommon and curious.  Perhapsyour name is shortribs, or sheepshanks, or laceleg, but healways answered, that is not my name.
On the third day the messenger came back again, and said, Ihave not been able to find a single new name, but as I came toa high mountain at the end of the forest, where the fox and the harebid each other good night, there I saw a little house, andbefore the house a fire was burning, and round about the firequite a ridiculous little man was jumping, he hopped uponone leg, and shouted -          to-day I bake, to-morrow brew,          the next I'll have the young queen's child.          Ha, glad am I that no one knew          that Rumpelstiltskin I am styled.
You may imagine how glad the queen was when she heard thename.  And when soon afterwards the little man came in, andasked, now, mistress queen, what is my name, at first shesaid, is your name Conrad?  No.  Is your name Harry?  No.Perhaps your name is Rumpelstiltskin?
The devil has told you that!  The devil has told you that, criedthe little man, and in his anger he plunged his right foot sodeep into the earth that his whole leg went in, and then inrage he pulled at his left leg so hard with both hands thathe tore himself in two.There was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had twodaughters, one ugly and wicked, and this one she loved because shewas her own daughter, and one beautiful and good, and this one shehated, because she was her step-daughter.  The step-daughter once hada pretty apron, which the other fancied so much that she becameenvious, and told her mother that she must and would have that apron.Be quiet, my child, said the old woman, and you shall have it.  Yourstep-sister has long deserved death, to-night when she is asleep Iwill come and cut her head off.  Only be careful that you are at thefar-side of the bed, and push her well to the front. It would havebeen all over with the poor girl if she had not just then beenstanding in a corner, and heard everything.
All day long she dared not go out of doors, and when bed-time hadcome, the witch's daughter got into bed first, so as to lie at thefar side, but when she was asleep, the other pushed her gently to thefront, and took for herself the place at the back, close by the wall.In the night, the old woman came creeping in, she held an axe in herright hand, and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at theoutside, and then she grasped the axe with both hands, and cut herown child's head off.
When she had gone away, the girl got up and went to her sweetheart,who was called roland, and knocked at his door.  When he came out,she said to him, listen, dearest roland, we must fly in all haste.My step-mother wanted to kill me, but has struck her own child.  Whendaylight comes, and she sees what she has done, we shall be lost.But, said roland, I counsel you first to take away her magic wand, orwe cannot escape if she pursues us.  The maiden fetched the magicwand, and she took the dead girl's head and dropped three drops ofblood on the ground, one in front of the bed, one in the kitchen, andone on the stairs. Then she hurried away with her lover.
When the old witch got up next morning, she called her daughter, andwanted to give her the apron, but she did not come.  Then the witchcried, where are you.  Here, on the stairs, I am sweeping, answeredthe first drop of blood.  The old woman went out, but saw no one onthe stairs, and cried again, where are you.  Here in the kitchen, Iam warming myself, cried the second drop of blood.  She went into thekitchen, but found no one.  Then she cried again, where are you.  Ah,here in the bed, I am sleeping, cried the third drop of blood.  Shewent into the room to the bed.  What did she see there.  Her ownchild, whose head she had cut off, bathed in her blood.
The witch fell into a passion, sprang to the window, and as she couldlook forth quite far into the world, she perceived her step-daughterhurrying away with her sweetheart roland.  That shall not help you,cried she, even if you have got a long way off, you shall still notescape me.  She put on her many league boots, in which she covered anhour's walk at every step, and it was not long before she overtookthem.  The girl, however, when she saw the old woman striding towardsher, changed, with her magic wand, her sweetheart roland into a lake,and herself into a duck swimming in the middle of it.
 The witch placed herself on the shore, threw bread-crumbs in, andwent to endless trouble to entice the duck, but the duck did not letherself be enticed, and the old woman had to go home at night as shehad come.  At this the girl and her sweetheart roland resumed theirnatural shapes again, and they walked on the whole night untildaybreak.  Then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful flowerwhich stood in the midst of a briar hedge, and her sweetheart rolandinto a fiddler.  It was not long before the witch came striding uptowards them, and said to the musician, dear musician, may I pluckthat beautiful flower for myself.
Oh, yes, he replied, I will play to you while you do it.  As she washastily creeping into the hedge and was just going to pluck theflower, knowing perfectly well who the flower was, he began to play,and whether she would or not, she was forced to dance, for it was amagical dance.  The faster he played, the more violent springs wasshe forced to make, and the thorns tore her clothes from her body,and pricked her and wounded her till she bled, and as he did notstop, she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground.
As they were now set free, roland said, now I will go to my fatherand arrange for the wedding.  Then in the meantime I will stay hereand wait for you, said the girl, and that no one may recognize me, Iwill change myself into a red stone land-mark.
Then roland went away, and the girl stood like a red land-mark in thefield and waited for her beloved.  But when roland got home, he fellinto the snares of another, who so fascinated him that he forgot themaiden.  The poor girl remained there a long time, but at length, ashe did not return at all, she was sad, and changed herself into aflower, and thought, someone will surely come this way, and trampleme down.
It befell, however, that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field, andsaw the flower, and as it was so pretty, plucked it, took it withhim, and laid it away in his chest.  From that time forth, strangethings happened in the shepherd's house.  When he arose in themorning all the work was already done, the room was swept, the tableand benches cleaned, the fire on the hearth was lighted, and thewater was fetched, and at noon, when he came home, the table waslaid, and a good dinner served.  He could not conceive how this cameto pass, for he never saw a human being in his house, and no onecould have concealed himself in it.
He was certainly pleased with this good attendance, but still at lasthe was so afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for heradvice.  The wise woman said, there is some enchantment behind it,listen very early some morning if anything is moving in the room, andif you see anything, no matter what it is, throw a white cloth overit, and then the magic will be stopped.
The shepherd did as she bade him, and next morning just as daydawned, he saw the chest open, and the flower come out.  Swiftly hesprang towards it, and threw a white cloth over it.  Instantly thetransformation came to an end, and a beautiful girl stood before him,who admitted to him that she had been the flower, and that up to thistime she had attended to his housekeeping.  She told him her story,and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him, but sheanswered, no, for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheartroland, although he had deserted her. Nevertheless, she promised notto go away, but to continue keeping house for the shepherd.
And now the time drew near when roland's wedding was to becelebrated, and then, according to an old custom in the country, itwas announced that all the girls were to be present at it, and singin honor of the bridal pair.  When the faithful maiden heard of this,she grew so sad that she thought her heart would break, and she wouldnot go thither, but the other girls came and took her.  When it cameto her turn to sing, she stepped back, until at last she was the onlyone left, and then she could not refuse.
But when she began her song, and it reached roland's ears, he sprangup and cried, I know the voice, that is the true bride, I will haveno other.  Everything he had forgotten, and which had vanished fromhis mind, had suddenly come home again to his heart.  Then thefaithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart roland, andgrief came to an end and joy began.In olden times there was a king, who had behind his palace abeautiful pleasure-garden in which there was a tree that bore goldenapples.  When the apples were getting ripe they were counted, but onthe very next morning one was missing.  This was told to the king,and he ordered that a watch should be kept every night beneath thetree.
The king had three sons, the eldest of whom he sent, as soon as nightcame on, into the garden, but when midnight came he could not keephimself from sleeping, and next morning again an apple was gone.
The following night the second son had to keep watch, but it fared nobetter with him, as soon as twelve o'clock had struck he fell asleep,and in the morning an apple was gone.
Now it came to the turn of the third son to watch, and he was quiteready, but the king had not much trust in him, and thought that hewould be of less use even than his brothers, but at last he let himgo.  The youth lay down beneath the tree, but kept awake, and did notlet sleep master him.  When it struck twelve, something rustledthrough the air, and in the moonlight he saw a bird coming whosefeathers were all shining with gold.
The bird alighted on the tree, and had just plucked off an apple,when the youth shot an arrow at him.  The bird flew off, but thearrow had struck his plumage, and one of his golden feathers felldown.  The youth picked it up, and the next morning took it to theking and told him what he had seen in the night.  The king called hiscouncil together, and everyone declared that a feather like this wasworth more than the whole kingdom.  If the feather is so precious,declared the king, one alone will not do for me, I must and will havethe whole bird.
The eldest son set out, and trusting to his cleverness thought thathe would easily find the golden bird.  When he had gone some distancehe saw a fox sitting at the edge of a wood so he cocked his gun andtook aim at him.  The fox cried, do not shoot me, and in return Iwill give you some good counsel.  You are on the way to the goldenbird, and this evening you will come to a village in which stand twoinns opposite to one another.
One of them is lighted up brightly, and all goes on merrily within,but do not go into it, go rather into the other, even though it lookslike a bad one.  How can such a silly beast give wise advice, thoughtthe king's son, and he pulled the trigger. But he missed the fox, whostretched out his tail and ran quickly into the wood.
So he pursued his way, and by evening came to the village where thetwo inns were, in one they were singing and dancing, the other had apoor, miserable look.  I should be a fool, indeed, he thought, if Iwere to go into the shabby tavern, and pass by the good one.  So hewent into the cheerful one, lived there in riot and revel, and forgotthe bird and his father, and all good counsels.
When many months had passed, and the eldest son did not come backhome, the second set out, wishing to find the golden bird.  The foxmet him as he had met the eldest, and gave him the good advice ofwhich he took no heed.  He came to the two inns, and his brother wasstanding at the window of the one from which came the music, andcalled out to him.  He could not resist, but went inside and livedonly for pleasure.
Again some time passed, and then the king's youngest son wanted toset off and try his luck, but his father would not allow it. It is ofno use, said he, he will find the golden bird still less than hisbrothers, and if a mishap were to befall him he knows not how to helphimself, he's not too bright at the best.  But at last, as he had nopeace, he let him go.
Again the fox was sitting outside the wood, and begged for his life,and offered his good advice.  The youth was good-natured, and said,be easy, little fox, I will do you no harm.  You shall not repent it,answered the fox, and that you may get on more quickly, get up behindon my tail.  And scarcely had he seated himself when the fox began torun, and away he went over stock and stone till his hair whistled inthe wind.  When they came to the village the youth got off, hefollowed the good advice, and without looking round turned into thelittle inn, where he spent the night quietly.
The next morning, as soon as he got into the open country, there satthe fox already, and said, I will tell you further what you have todo.  Go on quite straight, and at last you will come to a castle, infront of which a whole regiment of soldiers is lying, but do nottrouble yourself about them, for they will all be asleep and snoring.Go through the midst of them staight into the castle, and go throughall the rooms, till at last you will come to a chamber where a goldenbird is hanging in a wooden cage.  Close by, there stands an emptygold cage for show, but beware of taking the bird out of the commoncage and putting it into the fine one, or it may go badly with you.
With these words the fox again stretched out his tail, and the king'sson seated himself upon it, and away he went over stock and stonetill his hair whistled in the wind.
When he came to the castle he found everything as the fox had said.The king's son went into the chamber where the golden bird was shutup in a wooden cage, whilst a golden one stood by, and the threegolden apples lay about the room.  But, thought he, it would beabsurd if I were to leave the beautiful bird in the common and uglycage, so he opened the door, laid hold of it, and put it into thegolden cage.  But at the same moment the bird uttered a shrill cry.The soldiers awoke, rushed in, and took him off to prison.  The nextmorning he was taken before a court of justice, and as he confessedeverything, was sentenced to death.
The king, however, said that he would grant him his life on onecondition - namely, if he brought him the golden horse which ranfaster than the wind, and in that case he should receive, over andabove, as a reward, the golden bird.
The king's son set off, but he sighed and was sorrowful, for how washe to find the golden horse.  But all at once he saw his old friendthe fox sitting on the road.  Look you, said the fox, this hashappened because you did not give heed to me.  However, be of goodcourage.  I will give you my help, and tell you how to get to thegolden horse.  You must go straight on, and you will come to acastle, where in the stable stands the horse.  The grooms will belying in front of the stable, but they will be asleep and snoring,and you can quietly lead out the golden horse. But of one thing youmust take heed, put on him the common saddle of wood and leather, andnot the golden one, which hangs close by, else it will go ill withyou.  Then the fox stretched out his tail, the king's son seatedhimself upon it, and away he went over stock and stone until his hairwhistled in the wind.
Everything happened just as the fox had said, the prince came to thestable in which the golden horse was standing, but just as he wasgoing to put the common saddle upon him, he thought, such a beautifulbeast will be shamed if I do not give him the good saddle whichbelongs to him by right.  But scarcely had the golden saddle touchedthe horse than he began to neigh loudly. The grooms awoke, seized theyouth, and threw him into prison.
The next morning he was sentenced by the court to death, but the kingpromised to grant him his life, and the golden horse as well, if hecould bring back the beautiful princess from the golden castle.
With a heavy heart the youth set out, yet luckily for him he soonfound the trusty fox.  I ought only to leave you to your ill-luck,said the fox, but I pity you, and will help you once more out of yourtrouble.  This road takes you straight to the golden castle, you willreach it by eventide, and at night when everything is quiet thebeautiful princess goes to the bathing-house to bathe. When sheenters it, run up to her and give her a kiss, then she will followyou, and you can take her away with you, only do not allow her totake leave of her parents first, or it will go ill with you.
Then the fox stretched out his tail, the king's son seated himselfupon it, and away went the fox, over stock and stone, till his hairwhistled in the wind.
When he reached the golden castle it was just as the fox had said. Hewaited until midnight, when everything lay in deep sleep, and thebeautiful princess was going to the bathing-house. Then he sprang outand gave her a kiss.  She said that she would like to go with him,but she asked him pitifully, and with tears, to allow her first totake leave of her parents.  At first he withstood her prayer, butwhen she wept more and more, and fell at his feet, he at last gavein.  But no sooner had the maiden reached the bedside of her fatherthan he and all the rest in the castle awoke, and the youth was laidhold of and put into prison.
The next morning the king said to him, your life is forfeited, andyou can only find mercy if you take away the hill which stands infront of my windows, and prevents my seeing beyond it, and you mustfinish it all within eight days.  If you do that you shall have mydaughter as your reward.
The king's son began, and dug and shoveled without stopping, but whenafter seven days he saw how little he had done, and how all his workwas as good as nothing, he fell into great sorrow and gave up allhope.  But on the evening of the seventh day the fox appeared andsaid, you do not deserve that I should take my trouble about you, butjust go away and lie down to sleep, and I will do the work for you.
The next morning when he awoke and looked out of the window the hillhad gone.  The youth ran, full of joy, to the king, and told him thatthe task was fulfilled, and whether he liked it or not, the king hadto hold to his word and give him his daughter.
So the two set forth together, and it was not long before the trustyfox came up with them.  You have certainly got what is best, said he,but the golden horse also belongs to the maiden of the golden castle.How shall I get it, asked the youth. That I will tell you, answeredthe fox, first take the beautiful maiden to the king who sent you tothe golden castle.  There will be unheard-of rejoicing, they willgladly give you the golden horse, and will bring it out to you.Mount it as soon as possible, and offer your hand to all in farewell,last of all to the beautiful maiden.  And as soon as you have takenher hand swing her up on to the horse, and gallop away, and no onewill be able to bring you back, for the horse runs faster than thewind.
All was carried out successfully, and the king's son carried off thebeautiful princess on the golden horse.
The fox did not remain behind, and he said to the youth, now I willhelp you to get the golden bird.  When you come near to the castlewhere the golden bird is to be found, let the maiden get down, and Iwill take her into my care.  Then ride with the golden horse into thecastle-yard, there will be great rejoicing at the sight, and theywill bring out the golden bird for you.  As soon as you have the cagein your hand gallop back to us, and take the maiden away again.
When the plan had succeeded, and the king's son was about to ridehome with his treasures, the fox said, now you shall reward me for myhelp.  What do you require for it, asked the youth.  When you getinto the wood yonder, shoot me dead, and chop off my head and feet.
That would be fine gratitude, said the king's son.  I cannot possiblydo that for you.
The fox said, if you will not do it I must leave you, but before I goaway I will give you a piece of good advice.  Be careful about twothings.  Buy no gallows'-flesh, and do not sit at the edge of anywell.  And then he ran into the wood.
The youth thought, that is a wonderful beast, he has strange whims,who on earth would want to buy gallows'-flesh.  As for the desire tosit at the edge of a well it has never yet occurred to me.
He rode on with the beautiful maiden, and his road took him againthrough the village in which his two brothers had remained. There wasa great stir and noise, and, when he asked what was going on, he wastold that two men were going to be hanged.  As he came nearer to theplace he saw that they were his brothers, who had been playing allkinds of wicked pranks, and had squandered all their wealth.  Heinquired whether they could not be set free.  If you will pay forthem, answered the people, but why should you waste your money onwicked men, and buy them free. He did not think twice about it, butpaid for them, and when they were set free they all went on their waytogether.
They came to the wood where the fox had first met them, and as it wasa hot day, but cool and pleasant within the wood, the two brotherssaid, let us rest a little by the well, and eat and drink.  Heagreed, and whilst they were talking he forgot himself, and sat downupon the edge of the well without thinking of any evil.  But the twobrothers threw him backwards into the well, took the maiden, thehorse, and the bird, and went home to their father.  Here we bringyou not only the golden bird, said they, we have won the golden horsealso, and the maiden from the golden castle.  Then was there greatjoy, but the horse would not eat, the bird would not sing, and themaiden sat and wept.
But the youngest brother was not dead.  By good fortune the well wasdry, and he fell upon soft moss without being hurt, but he could notget out again.  Even in this strait the faithful fox did not leavehim, it came and leapt down to him, and upbraided him for havingforgotten its advice.  But yet I cannot give up, he said, I will helpyou up again into daylight.  He bade him grasp his tail and keeptight hold of it, and then he pulled him up. You are not out of alldanger yet, said the fox.  Your brothers were not sure of your death,and have surrounded the wood with watchers, who are to kill you ifyou let yourself be seen.  But a poor man was sitting upon the road,with whom the youth changed clothes, and in this way he got to theking's palace.
No one knew him, but the bird began to sing, the horse began to eat,and the beautiful maiden left off weeping.  The king, astonished,asked, what does this mean.  Then the maiden said, I do not know, butI have been so sorrowful and now I am so happy.  I feel as if my truebridegroom had come.  She told him all that had happened, althoughthe other brothers had threatened her with death if she were tobetray anything.
The king commanded that all people who were in his castle should bebrought before him, and amongst them came the youth in his raggedclothes, but the maiden knew him at once and fell upon his neck.  Thewicked brothers were seized and put to death, but he was married tothe beautiful maiden and declared heir to the king.
But what happened to the poor fox.  Long afterwards the king's sonwas once again walking in the wood, when the fox met him and said,you have everything now that you can wish for, but there is never anend to my misery, and yet it is in your power to free me, and againhe asked him with tears to shoot him dead and chop off his head andfeet.  So he did it, and scarcely was it done when the fox waschanged into a man, and was no other than the brother of thebeautiful princess, who at last was freed from the magic charm whichhad been laid upon him.  And now they had all the happiness theywanted as long as they lived.There were once upon a time two brothers, one rich and the otherpoor.  The rich one was a goldsmith and evil-hearted. The poor onesupported himself by making brooms, and was good and honorable.  Hehad two children, who were twin brothers and as like each other astwo drops of water.  The two boys went in and out of the rich house,and often got some of the scraps to eat.  It happened once when thepoor man was going into the forest to fetch brush-wood, that he saw abird which was quite golden and more beautiful than any he had everchanced to meet with.  He picked up a small stone, threw it at it,and was lucky enough to hit it, but one golden feather only felldown, and the bird flew away.  The man took the feather and carriedit to his brother, who looked at it and said, it is pure gold. Andgave him a great deal of money for it.  Next day the man climbed intoa birch-tree, and was about to cut off a couple of branches when thesame bird flew out, and when the man searched he found a nest, and anegg lay inside it, which was of gold.  He took the egg home with him,and carried it to his brother, who again said, it is pure gold, andgave him what it was worth.  At last the goldsmith said, I shouldindeed like to have the bird itself.  The poor man went into theforest for the third time, and again saw the golden bird sitting onthe tree, so he took a stone and brought it down and carried it tohis brother, who gave him a great heap of gold for it.  Now I can geton, thought he, and went contentedly home.
The goldsmith was crafty and cunning, and knew very well what kind ofa bird it was.  He called his wife and said, roast me the gold bird,and take care that none of it is lost.  I have a fancy to eat it allmyself.  The bird, however, was no common one, but of so wondrous akind that whosoever ate its heart and liver found every morning apiece of gold beneath his pillow.  The woman prepared the bird, putit on the spit, and let it roast.  Now it happened that while it wason the fire, and the woman was forced to go out of the kitchen onaccount of some other work, the two children of the poor broom-makerran in, stood by the spit and turned it round once or twice.  And asat that very moment two little bits of the bird fell down into thepan, one of the boys said, we will eat these two little bits.  I amso hungry, and no one will ever miss them.  Then the two ate thepieces, but the woman came into the kitchen and saw that they wereeating something and said, what have you been eating.  Two littlemorsels which fell out of the bird, answered they.  That must havebeen the heart and the liver, said the woman, quite frightened, andin order that her husband might not miss them and be angry, shequickly killed a young cock, took out his heart and liver, and putthem beside the golden bird.  When it was ready, she carried it tothe goldsmith, who consumed it all alone, and left none of it.  Nextmorning, however, when he felt beneath his pillow, and expected tobring out the piece of gold, no more gold pieces were there thanthere had always been.
The two children did not know what a piece of good-fortune had fallento their lot.  Next morning when they arose, something fell rattlingto the ground, and when they picked it up there were two gold pieces.They took them to their father, who was astonished and said, how canthat have happened.  When next morning they again found two, and soon daily, he went to his brother and told him the strange story.  Thegoldsmith at once knew how it had happened, and that the children hadeaten the heart and liver of the golden bird, and in order to revengehimself, and because he was envious and hard-hearted, he said to thefather, your children are in league with the evil one, do not takethe gold, and do not suffer them to stay any longer in your house,for he has them in his power, and may ruin you likewise.  The fatherfeared the evil one, and painful as it was to him, he neverthelessled the twins forth into the forest, and with a sad heart left themthere.
And now the two children ran about the forest, and sought the wayhome again, but could not find it, and only lost themselves more andmore.  At length they met with a huntsman, who asked, to whom do youchildren belong.  We are the poor broom-maker's boys, they replied,and they told him that their father would not keep them any longer inthe house because a piece of gold lay every morning under theirpillows.  Come, said the huntsman, that is nothing so very bad, if atthe same time you remain honest, and are not idle.  As the good manliked the children, and had none of his own, he took them home withhim and said, I will be your father, and bring you up till you arebig.  They learnt huntsmanship from him, and the piece of gold whicheach of them found when he awoke, was kept for them by him in casethey should need it in the future.
When they were grown up, their foster-father one day took them intothe forest with him, and said, to-day shall you make your trial shot,so that I may release you from your apprenticeship, and make youhuntsmen.  They went with him to lie in wait and stayed there a longtime, but no game appeared.  The huntsman, however, looked above himand saw a covey of wild geese flying in the form of a triangle, andsaid to one of them,  shoot me down one from each corner.  He did it,and thus accomplished his trial shot.
Soon after another covey came flying by in the form of the figuretwo, and the huntsman bade the other also bring down one from eachcorner, and his trial shot was likewise successful.  Now, said thefoster-father, I pronounce you out of your apprenticeship.  You areskilled huntsmen.  Thereupon the two brothers went forth togetherinto the forest, and took counsel with each other and plannedsomething.  And in the evening when they had sat down to supper, theysaid to their foster-father, we will not touch food, or take onemouthful, until you have granted us a request.  Said he, what, then,is your request.  They replied, we have now finished learning, and wemust prove ourselves in the world, so allow us to go away and travel.Then spoke the old man joyfully, you talk like brave huntsmen, thatwhich you desire has been my wish.  Go forth, all will go well withyou.  Thereupon they ate and drank joyously together.
When the appointed day came, their foster-father presented each ofthem with a good gun and a dog, and let each of them take as many ofhis saved-up gold pieces as he chose.  Then he accompanied them apart of the way, and when taking leave, he gave them a bright knife,and said, if ever you separate, stick this knife into a tree at theplace where you part, and when one of you returns, he will will beable to see how his absent brother is faring, for the side of theknife which is turned in the direction by which he went, will rust ifhe dies, but will remain bright as long as he is alive.  The twobrothers went still farther onwards, and came to a forest which wasso large that it was impossible for them to get out of it in one day.So they passed the night in it, and ate what they had put in theirhunting-pouches, but they walked all the second day likewise, andstill did not get out.  As they had nothing to eat, one of them said,we must shoot something for ourselves or we shall suffer from hunger,and loaded his gun, and looked about him.  And when an old hare camerunning up towards them, he laid his gun on his shoulder, but thehare cried,     dear huntsman, do but let me live,     two little ones to thee I'll give,and sprang instantly into the thicket, and brought two young ones.
But the little creatures played so merrily, and were so pretty, thatthe huntsmen could not find it in their hearts to kill them.  Theytherefore kept them with them, and the little hares followed on foot.Soon after this, a fox crept past.  They were just going to shoot it,but the fox cried,     dear hunstman, do but let me live,     two little ones to thee I'll give.
He, too, brought two little foxes, and the huntsmen did not like tokill them either, but gave them to the hares for company, and theyfollowed behind.  It was not long before a wolf strode out of thethicket.  The huntsmen made ready to shoot him, but the wolf cried,     dear huntsman, do but let me live,     two little ones to thee I'll give.
The huntsman put the two wolves beside the other animals, and theyfollowed behind them.  Then a bear came who wanted to trot about alittle longer, and cried,     dear huntsman, do but let me live,     two little ones to thee I'll give.
The two young bears were added to the others, and there were alreadyeight of them.  Then who should come.  A lion came, and tossed hismane.  But the huntsmen did not let themselves be frightened andaimed at him likewise, but the lion also said,     dear huntsman, do but let me live,     two little ones to thee I'll give.
And he brought his little ones to them, and now the huntsmen had twolions, two bears, two wolves, two foxes, and two hares, who followedthem and served them.  In the meantime their hunger was not appeasedby this, and they said to the foxes, listen you sneakers, provide uswith something to eat.  You are crafty and cunning.  They replied,not far from here lies a village, from which we have already broughtmany a fowl.  We will show you the way there.  So they went into thevillage, bought themselves something to eat, had some food given totheir beasts, and then traveled onwards.  The foxes knew their wayvery well about the district and where the poultry-yards were, andwere were able to guide the huntsmen.
Now they traveled about for a while, but could find no situationwhere they could remain together, so they said, there is nothing elsefor it, we must part.  They divided the animals, so that each of themhad a lion, a bear, a wolf, a fox, and a hare, then they took leaveof each other, promised to love each other like brothers till theirdeath, and stuck the knife which their foster-father had given them,into a tree, after which one went east and the other went west.
The younger, however, arrived with his beasts in a town which was allhung with black crape.  He went into an inn, and asked the host if hecould accommodate his animals.  The innkeeper gave him a stable,where there was a hole in the wall, and the hare crept out andfetched himself the head of a cabbage, and the fox fetched himself ahen, and when he had devoured it got the cock as well, but the wolf,the bear, and the lion could not get out because they were too big.Then the innkeeper let them be taken to a place where a cow happenedto be lying on the grass, that they might eat till they weresatisfied.  And when the huntsman had taken care of his animals, heasked the innkeeper why the town was thus hung with black crape.Said the host, because our king's only daughter is to die to-morrow.The huntsman inquired, is she sick unto death.  No, answered thehost, she is vigorous and healthy, nevertheless she must die.  How isthat, asked the huntsman.
There is a high hill without the town, whereon dwells a dragon whoevery year must have a pure virgin, or he lays the whole countrywaste, and now all the maidens have already been given to him, andthere is no longer anyone left but the king's daughter, yet there isno mercy for her.  She must be given up to him, and that is to bedone to-morrow.  Said the huntsman, why is the dragon not killed.Ah, replied the host, so many knights have tried it, but it has costall of them their lives.  The king has promised that he who conquersthe dragon shall have his daughter to wife, and shall likewise governthe kingdom after his own death.
The huntsman said nothing more to this, but next morning took hisanimals, and with them ascended the dragon's hill.  A little churchstood at the top of it, and on the altar three full cups werestanding, with the inscription.  Whosoever empties the cups willbecome the strongest man on earth, and will be able to wield thesword which is buried before the threshold of the door.  The huntsmandid not drink, but went out and sought for the sword in the ground,but was unable to move it from its place.  Then he went in andemptied the cups, and now he was strong enough to take up the sword,and his hand could quite easily wield it.  As the hour came when themaiden was to be delivered over to the dragon, the king, the marshal,and courtiers accompanied her.  From afar she saw the huntsman on thedragon's hill, and thought it was the dragon standing there waitingfor her, and did not want to go up to him, but at last, becauseotherwise the whole town would have been destroyed, she was forced totake the fatal journey.  The king and courtiers returned home full ofgrief.  The king's marshal, however, was to stand still, and see allfrom a distance.
When the king's daughter got to the top of the hill, it was not thedragon which stood there, but the young huntsman, who comforted her,and said he would save her, led her into the church, and locked herin.  It was not long before the seven-headed dragon came thither withloud roaring.  When he perceived the huntsman, he was astonished andsaid, what business have you here on the hill.  The huntsmananswered, I want to fight with you.  Said the dragon,  many knightshave left their lives here, I shall soon have made an end of you too,and he breathed fire out of seven jaws.
The fire was to have lighted the dry grass, and the huntsman was tohave been suffocated in the heat and smoke, but the animals camerunning up and trampled out the fire.  Then the dragon rushed uponthe huntsman, but he swung his sword until it sang through the air,and struck off three of his heads.  Then the dragon grew reallyfurious, and rose up in the air, and spat out flames of fire over thehuntsman, and was about to plunge down on him, but the huntsman oncemore drew out his sword, and again cut off three of his heads.  Themonster became faint and sank down.
Nevertheless it was just able to rush upon the huntsman, when he withhis last strength smote its tail off, and as he could fight nolonger, called up his animals who tore it in pieces.  When thestruggle was ended, the huntsman unlocked the church, and found theking's daughter lying on the floor, as she had lost her senses withanguish and terror during the contest.  He carried her out, and whenshe came to herself once more, and opened her eyes, he showed her thedragon all cut to pieces, and told her that she was now set free. Sherejoiced and said, now you will be my dearest husband, for my fatherhas promised me to him who kills the dragon.  Thereupon she took offher necklace of coral, and divided it amongst the animals in order toreward them, and the lion received the golden clasp.  Herpocket-handkerchief, however, on which was her name, she gave to thehuntsman, who went and cut the tongues out of the dragons, sevenheads, wrapped them in the handkerchief, and preserved themcarefully.
That done, as he was so faint and weary with the fire and the battle,he said to the maiden, we are both faint and weary, we will sleepawhile.  Then she said, yes, and they lay down on the ground, and thehuntsman said to the lion, you shall keep watch, that no onesurprises us in our sleep, and both fell asleep.  The lion lay downbeside them to watch, but he also was so weary with the fight, thathe called to the bear and said, lie down near me, I must sleep alittle.  If anything comes, waken me.  Then the bear lay down besidehim, but he also was tired, and called the wolf and said, lie down byme, I must sleep a little, but if anything comes, waken me.  Then thewolf lay down by him, but he was tired likewise, and called the foxand said, lie down by me, I must sleep a little, if anything comeswaken me.  Then the fox lay down beside him, but he too was weary,and called the hare and said, lie down near me, I must sleep alittle, and if anything should come, waken me.  Then the hare satdown by him, but the poor hare was tired too, and had no one whom hecould call there to keep watch, and fell asleep.  And now the king'sdaughter, the huntsman, the lion, the bear, the wolf, the fox, andthe hare, were all sleeping a sound sleep.  The marshal, however, whowas to look on from a distance, took courage when he did not see thedragon flying away with the maiden, and finding that all the hill hadbecome quiet, ascended it.
There lay the dragon hacked and hewn to pieces on the ground, and notfar from it were the king's daughter and a huntsman with his animals,and all of them were sunk in a sound sleep.  And as he was wicked andgodless he took his sword, cut off the huntsman's head, and seizedthe maiden in his arms, and carried her down the hill.  Then sheawoke and was terrified, but the marshal said, you are in my hands,you shall say that it was I who killed the dragon.
I cannot do that, she replied, for it was a huntsman with his animalswho did it.  Then he drew his sword, and threatened to kill her ifshe did not obey him, and so compelled her that she promised it.Then he took her to the king, who did not know how to contain himselffor joy when he once more looked on his dear child in life, whom hehad believed to have been torn to pieces by the monster.  The marshalsaid to him, I have killed the dragon, and delivered the maiden andthe whole kingdom as well, therefore I demand her as my wife, as waspromised.  The king said to the maiden, is what he says true.  Ah,yes, she answered, it must indeed be true, but I will not consent tohave the wedding celebrated until after a year and a day, for shethought in that time she should hear something of her dear huntsman.
The animals, however, were still lying sleeping beside their deadmaster on the dragon's hill, and there came a great bumble-bee andlighted on the hare's nose, but the hare wiped it off with his paw,and went on sleeping.  The bumble-bee came a second time, but thehare again rubbed it off and slept on.  Then it came for the thirdtime, and stung his nose so that he awoke.  As soon as the hare wasawake, he roused the fox, and the fox, the wolf, and the wolf thebear, and the bear the lion.  And when the lion awoke and saw thatthe maiden was gone, and his master was dead, he began to roarfrightfully and cried, who has done that.  Bear, why did you notwaken me.  The bear asked the wolf, why did you not waken me.  Andthe wolf the fox, why did you not waken me.  And the fox the hare,why did you not waken me.  The poor hare alone did not know whatanswer to make, and the blame rested with him.  Then they were justgoing to fall upon him, but he entreated them and said, kill me not,I will bring our master to life again.  I know a mountain on which aroot grows which, when placed in the mouth of anyone, cures him ofall illness and every wound.  But the mountain lies two hundredhours, journey from here.
The lion said, in four-and-twenty hours must you have run thither andhave come back, and have brought the root with you. Then the haresprang away, and in four-and-twenty hours he was back, and broughtthe root with him.  The lion put the huntsman's head on again, andthe hare placed the root in his mouth, and immediately everythingunited together again, and his heart beat, and life came back.  Thenthe huntsman awoke, and was alarmed when he did not see the maiden,and thought, she must have gone away whilst I was sleeping, in orderto get rid of me.  The lion in his great haste had put his master'shead on the wrong way round, but the huntsman did not observe itbecause of his melancholy thoughts about the king's daughter.  But atnoon, when he was going to eat something, he saw that his head wasturned backwards and could not understand it, and asked the animalswhat had happened to him in his sleep.  Then the lion told him thatthey, too, had all fallen asleep from weariness, and on awaking, hadfound him dead with his head cut off, that the hare had brought thelife-giving root, and that he, in his haste, had laid hold of thehead the wrong way, but that he would repair his mistake.  Then hetore the huntsman's head off again, turned it round, and the harehealed it with the root.
The huntsman, however, was sad at heart, and traveled about theworld, and made his animals dance before people.  It came to passthat precisely at the end of one year he came back to the same townwhere he had rescued the king's daughter from the dragon, and thistime the town was gaily hung with red cloth.  Then he said to thehost, what does this mean.  Last year the town was all hung withblack crape, what means the red cloth to-day.  The host answered,last year our king's daughter was to have been delivered over to thedragon, but the marshal fought with it and killed it, and soto-morrow their wedding is to be solemnized, and that is why the townwas then hung with black crape for mourning, and is to-day coveredwith red cloth for joy.
Next day when the wedding was to take place, the huntsman said atmid-day to the inn-keeper, do you believe, sir host, that I whilewith you here to-day shall eat bread from the king's own table.
Nay, said the host, I would bet a hundred pieces of gold that thatwill not come true.  The huntsman accepted the wager, and set againstit a purse with just the same number of gold pieces. Then he calledthe hare and said, go, my dear runner, and fetch me some of the breadwhich the king is eating.  Now the little hare was the lowest of theanimals, and could not transfer this order to any the others, but hadto get on his legs himself.  Alas. Thought he, if I bound through thestreets thus alone, the butchers, dogs will all be after me.  Ithappened as he expected, and the dogs came after him and wanted tomake holes in his good skin.  But he sprang away, you have never seenthe like, and sheltered himself in a sentry-box without the soldierbeing aware of it.  Then the dogs came and wanted to have him out,but the soldier did not understand a jest, and struck them with thebutt-end of his gun, till they ran away yelling and howling.  As soonas the hare saw that the way was clear, he ran into the palace andstraight to the king's daughter, sat down under her chair, andscratched at her foot.  Then she said, will you get away, and thoughtit was her dog.  The hare scratched her foot for the second time, andshe again said, will you get away, and thought it was her dog.  Butthe hare did not let itself be turned from its purpose, and scratchedher for the third time.  Then she peeped down, and knew the hare byits collar.
She took him on her lap, carried him into her chamber, and said, dearhare, what do you want.  He answered, my master, who killed thedragon, is here, and has sent me to ask for a loaf of bread like thatwhich the king eats.  Then she was full of joy and had the bakersummoned, and ordered him to bring a loaf such as was eaten by theking.  The little hare said, but the baker must likewise carry itthither for me, that the butchers, dogs may do no harm to me.  Thebaker carried if for him as far as the door of the inn, and then thehare got on his hind legs, took the loaf in his front paws, andcarried it to his master.  Then said the huntsman, behold, sir host,the hundred pieces of gold are mine.  The host was astonished, butthe huntsman went on to say, yes, sir host, I have the bread, but nowI will likewise have some of the king's roast meat.
The host said, I should indeed like to see that, but he would make nomore wagers.  The huntsman called the fox and said, my little fox, goand fetch me some roast meat, such as the king eats.
The red fox knew the byways better, and went by holes and cornerswithout any dog seeing him, seated himself under the chair of theking's daughter, and scratched her foot.  Then she looked down andrecognized the fox by its collar, took him into her chamber with herand said, dear fox, what do you want.  He answered, my master, whokilled the dragon, is here, and has sent me.  I am to ask for someroast meat such as the king is eating.  Then she made the cook come,who was obliged to prepare a roast joint, the same as was eaten bythe king, and to carry it for the fox as far as the door.  Then thefox took the dish, waved away with his tail the flies which hadsettled on the meat, and then carried it to his master.  Behold, sirhost, said the huntsman, bread and meat are here but now I will alsohave proper vegetables with it, such as are eaten by the king.  Thenhe called the wolf, and said, dear wolf, go thither and fetch mevegetables such as the king eats.
Then the wolf went straight to the palace, as he feared no one, andwhen he got to the king's daughter's parlor, he tugged at the back ofher dress, so that she was forced to look round.  She recognized himby his collar, and took him into her chamber with her, and said, dearwolf, what do you want.  He answered, my master, who killed thedragon, is here, I am to ask for some vegetables, such as the kingeats.  Then she made the cook come, and he had to make ready a dishof vegetables, such as the king ate, and had to carry it for the wolfas far as the door, and then the wolf took the dish from him, andcarried it to his master.  Behold, sir host, said the huntsman, now Ihave bread and meat and vegetables, but I will also have some pastryto eat like that which the king eats.  He called the bear, and said,dear bear, you are fond of licking anything sweet, go and bring mesome confectionery, such as the king eats.
The the bear trotted to the palace, and everyone got out of his way,but when he went to the guard, they presented their muskets, andwould not let him go into the royal palace.  But he got up on hishind legs, and gave them a few boxes on the ears, right and left,with his paws, so that the whole watch broke up, and then he wentstraight to the king's daughter, placed himself behind her, andgrowled a little.  Then she looked behind her, knew the bear, andbade him go into her room with her, and said, dear bear, what do youwant.  He answered, my master, who killed the dragon, is here, and Iam to ask for some confectionery such as the king eats.  Then shesummoned her confectioner, who had to bake confectionery such as theking ate, and carry it to the door for the bear.  Then the bear firstlicked up the comfits which had rolled down, and then he stoodupright, took the dish, and carried it to his master.  Behold, sirhost, said the huntsman, now I have bread, meat, vegetables andconfectionery, but I will drink wine also, and such as the kingdrinks.  He called his lion to him and said, dear lion, you yourselflike to drink till you are tipsy, go and fetch me some wine, such asis drunk by the king.
Then the lion strode through the streets, and the people fled fromhim, and when he came to the watch, they wanted to bar the wayagainst him, but he did but roar once, and they all ran away.  Thenthe lion went to the royal apartment, and knocked at the door withhis tail.  The the king's daughter came forth, and was almost afraidof the lion, but she knew him by the golden clasp of her necklace,and bade him go with her into her chamber, and said, dear lion, whatwill you have.  He answered, my master, who killed the dragon, ishere, and I am to ask for some wine such as is drunk by the king.Then she bade the cup-bearer be called, who was to give the lion somewine like that which was drunk by the king.  The lion said, I will gowith him, and see that I get the right wine.  Then he went down withthe cup-bearer, and when they were below, the cup-bearer wanted todraw him some of the common wine that was drunk by the king'sservants, but the lion said, stop, I will taste the wine first, andhe drew half a measure, and swallowed it down at one draught.  No,said he, that is not right.  The cup-bearer looked at him askance,but went on, and was about to give him some out of another barrelwhich was for the king's marshal.  The lion said, stop, let me tastethe wine first, and drew half a measure and drank it.  That isbetter, but still not right, said he.  Then the cup-bearer grew angryand said, how can a stupid animal like you understand wine.  But thelion gave him a blow behind the ears, which made him fall down by nomeans gently, and when he had got up again, he conducted the lionquite silently into a little cellar apart, where the king's wine lay,from which no one ever drank.  The lion first drew half a measure andtried the wine, and then he said, that may possibly be the rightsort, and bade the cup-bearer fill six bottles of it.  And now theywent upstairs again, but when the lion came out of the cellar intothe open air, he reeled here and there, and was rather drunk, and thecup-bearer was forced to carry the wine as far as the door for him,and then the lion took the handle of the basket in his mouth, andtook it to his master.  The huntsman said, behold, sir host, herehave I bread, meat, vegetables, confectionery and wine such as theking has, and now I will dine with my animals, and he sat down andate and drank, and gave the hare, the fox, the wolf, the bear, andthe lion also to eat and to drink, and was joyful, for he saw thatthe king's daughter still loved him.  And when he had finished hisdinner, he said, sir host, now have I eaten and drunk, as the kingeats and drinks, and now I will go to the king's court and marry theking's daughter.
Said the host, how can that be, when she already has a betrothedhusband, and when the wedding is to be solemnized to-day.  Then thehuntsman drew forth the handerchief which the king's daughter hadgiven him on the dragon's hill, and in which were folded themonster's seven tongues, and said, that which I hold in my hand shallhelp me to do it.  Then the innkeeper looked at the handkerchief, andsaid, whatever I believe, I do not believe that, and I am willing tostake my house and courtyard on it.  The huntsman, however, took abag with a thousand gold pieces, put it on the table, and said, Istake that on it.
Now the king said to his daughter, at the royal table, what did allthe wild animals want, which have been coming to you, and going inand out of my palace.  She replied, I may not tell you, but send andhave the master of these animals brought, and you will do well.  Theking sent a servant to the inn, and invited the stranger, and theservant came just as the huntsman had laid his wager with theinnkeeper.  Then said he, behold, sir host, now the king sends hisservant and invites me, but I do not go in this way.
And he said to the servant, I request the lord king to send me royalclothing, and a carriage with six horses, and servants to attend me.When the king heard the answer, he said to his daughter, what shall Ido.  She said, cause him to be fetched as he desires to be, and youwill do well.  Then the king sent royal apparel, a carriage with sixhorses, and servants to wait on him.  When the huntsman saw themcoming, he said, behold, sir host, now I am fetched as I desired tobe, and he put on the royal garments, took the handerchief with thedragon's tongues with him, and drove off to the king.  When the kingsaw him coming, he said to his daughter, how shall I receive him.She answered, go to meet him and you will do well.  Then the kingwent to meet him and led him in, and his animals followed.  The kinggave him a seat near himself and his daughter, and the marshal, asbridegroom, sat on the other side, but no longer knew the huntsman.And now at this very moment, the seven heads of the dragon werebrought in as a spectacle, and the king said, the seven heads werecut off the dragon by the marshal, wherefore to-day I give him mydaughter to wife.  The the huntsman stood up, opened the sevenmouths, and said, where are the seven tongues of the dragon.  Thenwas the marshal terrified, and grew pale and knew not what answer heshould make, and at length in his anguish he said, dragons have notongues.  The huntsman said, liars ought to have none, but thedragon's tongues are the tokens of the victor, and he unfolded thehanderchief, and there lay all seven inside it.  And he put eachtongue in the mouth to which it belonged, and it fitted exactly.
Then he took the handkerchief on which the name of the princess wasembroidered, and showed it to the maiden, and asked to whom she hadgiven it, and she replied, to him who killed the dragon. And then hecalled his animals, and took the collar off each of them and thegolden clasp from the lion, and showed them to the maiden and askedto whom they belonged.  She answered, the necklace and golden claspwere mine, but I divided them among the animals who helped to conquerthe dragon.  Then spoke the huntsman, when I, tired of the fight, wasresting and sleeping, the marshal came and cut off my head.  Then hecarried away the king's daughter, and gave out that it was he who hadkilled the dragon, but that he lied I prove with the tongues, thehandkerchief, and the necklace.
And then he related how his animals had healed him by means of awonderful root, and how he had traveled about with them for one year,and had at length come there and had learnt the treachery of themarshal by the inn-keeper's story.  Then the king asked his daughter,is it true that this man killed the dragon.
And she answered, yes, it is true.  Now can I reveal the wicked deedof the marshal, as it has come to light without my connivance, for hewrung from me a promise to be silent.  For this reason, however, didI make the condition that the marriage should not be solemnized for ayear and a day.  Then the king bade twelve councillors be summonedwho were to pronounce judgment on the marshal, and they sentenced himto be torn to pieces by four bulls.
The marshal was therefore executed, but the king gave his daughter tothe huntsman, and named him his viceroy over the whole kingdom.  Thewedding was celebrated with great joy, and the young king caused hisfather and his foster-father to be brought, and loaded them withtreasures.  Neither did he forget the inn-keeper, but sent for himand said, behold, sir host, I have married the king's daughter, andyour house and yard are mine.
The host said, yes, according to justice it is so.  But the youngking said, it shall be done according to mercy, and told him that heshould keep his house and yard, and gave him the thousand pieces ofgold as well.
And now the young king and queen were thoroughly happy, and lived ingladness together.  He often went out hunting because it was adelight to him, and the faithful animals had to accompany him.  Inthe neighborhood, however, there was a forest of which it wasreported that it was haunted, and that whosoever did but enter it didnot easily get out again.  But the young king had a great inclinationto hunt in it, and let the old king have no peace until he allowedhim to do so.  So he rode forth with a great following, and when hecame to the forest, he saw a snow-white hind, and said to his men,wait here until I return, I want to hunt that beautiful creature, andhe rode into the forest after it, followed only by his animals.  Theattendants halted and waited until evening, but he did not return, sothey rode home, and told the young queen that the young king hadfollowed a white hind into the enchanted forest, and had not comeback again.  Then she was in the greatest concern about him.  He,however, had still continued to ride on and on after the beautifulwild animal, and had never been able to overtake it, when he thoughthe was near enough to aim, he instantly saw it bound away into thefar distance, and at length it vanished altogether.  And now heperceived that he had penetrated deep into the forest, and blew hishorn but he received no answer, for his attendants could not hear it.And as night was falling, he saw that he could not get home that day,so he dismounted from his horse, lighted himself a fire near a tree,and resolved to spend the night by it.  While he was sitting by thefire, and his animals also were lying down beside him, it seemed tohim that he heard a human voice.  He looked round, but couldperceived nothing.  Soon afterwards, he again heard a groan as iffrom above, and then he looked up, and saw an old woman sitting inthe tree, who wailed unceasingly, oh, oh, oh, how cold I am.  Saidhe, come down, and warm yourself if you are cold.  But she said, no,your animals will bite me.  He answered, they will do you no harm,old mother, do come down.  She, however, was a witch, and said, Iwill throw down a wand from the tree, and if you strike them on theback with it, they will do me no harm.  Then she threw him a smallwand, and he struck them with it, and instantly they lay still andwere turned into stone.  And when the witch was safe from theanimals, she leapt down and touched him also with a wand, and changedhim to stone.  Thereupon she laughed, and dragged him and the animalsinto a vault, where many more such stones already lay.
As the young king did not come back at all, the queen's anguish andcare grew constantly greater.  And it so happened that at this verytime the other brother who had turned to the east when theyseparated, came into the kingdom.  He had sought a situation, and hadfound none, and had then traveled about here and there, and had madehis animals dance.  Then it came into his mind that he would just goand look at the knife that they had thrust in the trunk of a tree attheir parting, that he might learn how his brother was.  When he gotthere his brother's side of the knife was half rusted, and halfbright.  Then he was alarmed and thought, a great misfortune musthave befallen my brother, but perhaps I can still save him, for halfthe knife is still bright.  He and his animals traveled towards thewest, and when he entered the gate of the town, the guard came tomeet him, and asked if he was to announce him to his consort theyoung queen, who had for a couple of days been in the greatest sorrowabout his staying away, and was afraid he had been killed in theenchanted forest.
The sentries, indeed, thought no otherwise than that he was the youngking himself, for he looked so like him, and had wild animals runningbehind him.  Then he saw that they were speaking of his brother, andthought, it will be better if I pass myself off for him, and then Ican rescue him more easily.  So he allowed himself to be escortedinto the castle by the guard, and was received with the greatest joy.The young queen indeed thought that he was her husband, and asked himwhy he had stayed away so long.  He answered, I had lost myself in aforest, and could not find my way out again any sooner.  At night hewas taken to the royal bed, but he laid a two-edged sword between himand the young queen, she did not know what that could mean, but didnot venture to ask.
He remained in the palace a couple of days, and in the meantimeinquired into everything which related to the enchanted forest, andat last he said, I must hunt there once more.  The king and the youngqueen wanted to persuade him not to do it, but he stood out againstthem, and went forth with a larger following.  When he had got intothe forest, it fared with him as with his brother, he saw a whitehind and said to his men, stay here, and wait until I return, I wantto chase the lovely wild beast, and then he rode into the forest andhis animals ran after him.  But he could not overtake the hind, andgot so deep into the forest that he was forced to pass the nightthere.  And when he had lighted a fire, he heard someone wailingabove him, oh, oh, oh, how cold I am.
Then he looked up, and the self-same witch was sitting in the tree.Said he, if you are cold, come down, little old mother, and warmyourself.  She answered, no, your animals will bite me. But he said,they will not hurt you.  Then she cried, I will throw down a wand toyou, and if you smite them with it they will do me no harm.  When thehuntsman heard that, he had no confidence in the old woman, and said,I will not strike my animals.  Come down, or I will fetch you.  Thenshe cried, what do you want.  You shall not touch me.  But hereplied, if you do not come, I will shoot you.  Said she, shoot away,I do not fear your bullets.
Then he aimed, and fired at her, but the witch was proof against allleaden bullets, and laughed shrilly and cried, you shall not hit me.The huntsman knew what to do, tore three silver buttons off his coat,and loaded his gun with them, for against them her arts were useless,and when he fired she fell down at once with a scream.  Then he sethis foot on her and said, old witch, if you do not instantly confesswhere my brother is, I will seize you with both my hands and throwyou into the fire.  She was in a great fright, begged for mercy andsaid, he and his animals lie in a vault, turned to stone.  Then hecompelled her to go thither with him, threatened her, and said, oldsea-cat, now you shall make my brother and all the human beings lyinghere, alive again, or you shall go into the fire.  She took a wandand touched the stones, and then his brother with his animals came tolife again, and many others, merchants, artisans, and shepherds,arose, thanked him for their deliverance, and went to their homes.But when the twin brothers saw each other again, they kissed eachother and rejoiced with all their hearts.  Then they seized thewitch, bound her and laid her on the fire, and when she was burnt theforest opened of its own accord, and was light and clear, and theking's palace could be seen at about the distance of a three hours,walk.
Thereupon the two brothers went home together, and on the way toldeach other their histories.  And when the younger said that he wasruler of the whole country in the king's stead, the other observed,that I remarked very well, for when I came to the town, and was takenfor you, all royal honors were paid me, the young queen looked on meas her husband, and I had to eat at her side, and sleep in your bed.When the other heard that, he became so jealous and angry that hedrew his sword, and struck off his brother's head.  But when he sawhim lying there dead, and saw his red blood flowing, he repented mostviolently, my brother delivered me, cried he, and I have killed himfor it, and he bewailed him aloud.  Then his hare came and offered togo and bring some of the root of life, and bounded away and broughtit while yet there was time, and the dead man was brought to lifeagain, and knew nothing about the wound.
After this they journeyed onwards, and the younger said, you looklike me, you have royal apparel on as I have, and the animals followyou as they do me, we will go in by opposite gates, and arrive at thesame time from the two sides in the aged king's presence.  So theyseparated, and at the same time came the watchmen from the one doorand from the other, and announced that the young king and the animalshad returned from the chase.
The king said, it is not possible, the gates lie quite a mile apart.In the meantime, however, the two brothers entered the courtyard ofthe palace from opposite sides, and both mounted the steps. Then theking said to the daughter, say which is your husband.
Each of them looks exactly like the other, I cannot tell.  Then shewas in great distress, and could not tell, but at last she rememberedthe necklace which she had given to the animals, and she sought forand found her little golden clasp on the lion, and she cried in herdelight, he who is followed by this lion is my true husband.  Thenthe young king laughed and said, yes, he is the right one, and theysat down together to table, and ate and drank, and were merry.  Atnight when the young king went to bed, his wife said, why have youfor these last nights always laid a two-edged sword in our bed.  Ithought you had a wish to kill me.  Then he knew how true his brotherhad been.
Two kings' sons once went out in search of adventures, and fell intoa wild, disorderly way of living, so that they never came home again.The youngest, who was called simpleton, set out to seek his brothers,but when at length he found them they mocked him for thinking that hewith his simplicity could get through the world, when they two couldnot make their way, and yet were so much cleverer.
They all three traveled away together, and came to an ant-hill.  Thetwo elder wanted to destroy it, to see the little ants creeping aboutin their terror, and carrying their eggs away, but simpleton said,leave the creatures in peace, I will not allow you to disturb them.
Then they went onwards and came to a lake, on which a great number ofducks were swimming.  The two brothers wanted to catch a couple androast them, but simpleton would not permit it, and said, leave thecreatures in peace, I will not suffer you to kill them.
At length they came to a bee's nest, in which there was so much honeythat it ran out of the trunk of the tree where it was.  The twowanted to make a fire beneath the tree, and suffocate the bees inorder to take away the honey, but simpleton again stopped them andsaid, leave the creatures in peace, I will not allow you to burnthem.
At length the three brothers arrived at a castle where stone horseswere standing in the stables, and no human being was to be seen, andthey went through all the halls until, quite at the end, they came toa door in which were three locks.  In the middle of the door,however, there was a little pane, through which they could see intothe room.  There they saw a little grey man, who was sitting at atable.  They called him, once, twice, but he did not hear, at lastthey called him for the third time, when he got up, opened the locks,and came out.  He said nothing, however, but conducted them to ahandsomely-spread table, and when they had eaten and drunk, he tookeach of them to a bedroom.
Next morning the little grey man came to the eldest, beckoned to him,and conducted him to a stone table, on which were inscribed threetasks, by the performance of which the castle could be delivered fromenchantment.
The first was that in the forest, beneath the moss, lay theprincess's pearls, a thousand in number, which must be picked up, andif by sunset one single pearl was missing, he who had looked for themwould be turned into stone.  The eldest went thither, and sought thewhole day, but when it came to an end, he had only found one hundred,and what was written on the table came true, and he was turned intostone. Next day, the second brother undertook the adventure, but itdid not fare much better with him than with the eldest, he did notfind more than two hundred pearls, and was changed to stone.  At lastit was simpleton's turn to seek in the moss, but it was so difficultfor him to find the pearls, and he got on so slowly, that he seatedhimself on a stone, and wept.  And while he was thus sitting, theking of the ants whose life he had once saved, came with fivethousand ants, and before long the little creatures had got all thepearls together, and laid them in a heap.
The second task, however, was to fetch out of the lake the key of theking's daughter's bed-chamber.  When simpleton came to the lake, theducks which he had saved, swam up to him, dived down, and brought thekey out of the water.
But the third task was the most difficult, from amongst the threesleeping daughters of the king was the youngest and dearest to besought out.  They, however, resembled each other exactly, and wereonly to be distinguished by their having eaten different sweetmeatsbefore they fell asleep, the eldest a bit of sugar, the second alittle syrup, and the youngest a spoonful of honey.
Then the queen of the bees, whom simpleton had protected from thefire, came and tasted the lips of all three, and at last she remainedsitting on the mouth which had eaten honey, and thus the king's sonrecognized the right princess.  Then the enchantment was at an end,everything was delivered from sleep, and those who had been turned tostone received once more their natural forms.
Simpleton married the youngest and sweetest princess, and after herfather's death became king, and his two brothers received the twoother sisters.There was once upon a time a king who had three sons, of whom twowere clever and wise, but the third did not speak much, and wassimple, and was called the simpleton.  When the king had become oldand weak, and was thinking of his end, he did not know which of hissons should inherit the kingdom after him.  Then he said to them, goforth, and he who brings me the most beautiful carpet shall be kingafter my death.
And that there should be no dispute amongst them, he took themoutside his castle, blew three feathers in the air, and said, youshall go as they fly.  One feather flew to the east, the other to thewest, but the third flew straight up and did not fly far, but soonfell to the ground.
And now one brother went to the right, and the other to the left, andthey mocked simpleton, who was forced to stay where the third featherhad fallen.  He sat down and was sad.  Then all at once he saw thatthere was a trap-door close by the feather.  He raised it up, foundsome steps, and went down them.  Then he came to another door,knocked at it, and heard somebody inside calling -          little green waiting-maid,          waiting-maid with the limping leg,          little dog of the limping leg,          hop hither and thither,          and quickly see who is without.
The door opened, and he saw a great, fat toad sitting, and roundabout her a crowd of little toads.  The fat toad asked what hewanted.  He answered, I should like to have the prettiest and finestcarpet in the world.  Then she called a young one and said -          little green waiting-maid,          waiting-maid with the limping leg,          little dog of the limping leg,          hop hither and thither,          and bring me the great box.
The young toad brought the box, and the fat toad opened it, and gavesimpleton a carpet out of it, so beautiful and so fine, that on theearth above, none could have been woven like it.  Then he thankedher, and climbed out again.
The two others, however, had looked on their youngest brother as sostupid that they believed he would find and bring nothing at all.Why should we give ourselves a great deal of trouble searching, saidthey, and got some coarse handkerchiefs from the first shepherds'wives whom they met, and carried them home to the king.
At the same time simpleton also came back, and brought his beautifulcarpet, and when the king saw it he was astonished, and said, ifjustice be done, the kingdom belongs to the youngest.  But the twoothers let their father have no peace, and said that it wasimpossible that simpleton, who in everything lacked understanding,should be king, and entreated him to make a new agreement with them.Then the father said, he who brings me the most beautiful ring shallinherit the kingdom, and led the three brothers out, and blew intothe air three feathers, which they were to follow.  Those of the twoeldest again went east and west, and simpleton's feather flewstraight up, and fell down near the door into the earth.
Then he went down again to the fat toad, and told her that he wantedthe most beautiful ring.  She at once ordered her big box to bebrought, and gave him a ring out of it, which sparkled with jewels,and was so beautiful that no goldsmith on earth would have been ableto make it.
The two eldest laughed at simpleton for going to seek a golden ring.They gave themselves no trouble, but knocked the nails out of an oldcarriage-ring, and took it to the king, but when simpleton producedhis golden ring, his father again said, the kingdom belongs to him.The two eldest did not cease from tormenting the king until he made athird condition, and declared that the one who brought the mostbeautiful woman home, should have the kingdom.  He again blew thethree feathers into the air, and they flew as before.
Then simpleton without more ado went down to the fat toad, and said,I am to take home the most beautiful woman.  Oh, answered the toad,the most beautiful woman.  She is not at hand at the moment, butstill you shall have her.  She gave him a yellow turnip which hadbeen hollowed out, to which six mice were harnessed.  Then simpletonsaid quite mournfully, what am I to do with that.  The toad answered,just put one of my little toads into it.  Then he seized one atrandom out of the circle, and put her into the yellow coach, buthardly was she seated inside it than she turned into a wonderfullybeautiful maiden, and the turnip into a coach, and the six mice intohorses.  So he kissed her, and drove off quickly with the horses, andtook her to the king.
His brothers, who came afterwards, had given themselves no trouble atall looking for beautiful girls, but had brought with them the firstpeasant women they chanced to meet.  When the king saw them he said,after my death the kingdom belongs to my youngest son.  But the twoeldest deafened the king's ears afresh with their clamor, we cannotconsent to simpleton's being king, and demanded that the one whosewife could leap through a ring which hung in the centre of the hallshould have the preference.  They thought, the peasant women can dothat easily, they are strong enough, but the delicate maiden willjump herself to death.
The aged king agreed likewise to this.  Then the two peasant womenjumped, and jumped through the ring, but were so clumsy that theyfell, and their coarse arms and legs broke in two.  And then thepretty maiden whom simpleton had brought with him, sprang, and sprangthrough as lightly as a deer, and all opposition had to cease. So hereceived the crown, and has ruled wisely for a length of time.There was a man who had three sons, the youngest of whom was calledDummling, and was despised, mocked, and sneered at on every occasion.
It happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood,and before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and abottle of wine in order that he might not suffer from hunger orthirst.
When he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man whobade him good-day, and said, do give me a piece of cake out of yourpocket, and let me have a draught of your wine, I am so hungry andthirsty.  But the clever son answered, if I give you my cake andwine, I shall have none for myself, be off with you, and he left thelittle man standing and went on.
But when he began to hew down a tree, it was not long before he madea false stroke, and the axe cut him in the arm, so that he had to gohome and have it bound up.  And this was the little grey man's doing.
After this the second son went into the forest, and his mother gavehim, like the eldest, a cake and a bottle of wine.  The little oldgrey man met him likewise, and asked him for a piece of cake and adrink of wine.  But the second son, too, said sensibly enough, what Igive you will be taken away from myself, be off, and he left thelittle man standing and went on.  His punishment, however, was notdelayed, when he had made a few blows at the tree he struck himselfin the leg, so that he had to be carried home.
Then Dummling said, father, do let me go and cut wood.  The fatheranswered, your brothers have hurt themselves with it, leave it alone,you do not understand anything about it.  But Dummling begged so longthat at last he said, just go then, you will get wiser by hurtingyourself.  His mother gave him a cake made with water and baked inthe cinders, and with it a bottle of sour beer.
When he came to the forest the little old grey man met him likewise,and greeting him, said, give me a piece of your cake and a drink outof your bottle, I am so hungry and thirsty.
Dummling answered, I have only cinder-cake and sour beer, if thatpleases you, we will sit down and eat.  So they sat down, and whenDummling pulled out his cinder-cake, it was a fine sweet cake, andthe sour beer had become good wine.  So they ate and drank, and afterthat the little man said, since you have a good heart, and arewilling to divide what you have, I will give you good luck. Therestands an old tree, cut it down, and you will find something at theroots.  Then the little man took leave of him.
Dummling went and cut down the tree, and when it fell there was agoose sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold. He lifted herup, and taking her with him, went to an inn where he thought he wouldstay the night.  Now the host had three daughters, who saw the gooseand were curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be, andwould have liked to have one of its golden feathers.
The eldest thought, I shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out afeather, and as soon as Dummling had gone out she seized the goose bythe wing, but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it.
The second came soon afterwards, thinking only of how she might get afeather for herself, but she had scarcely touched her sister than shewas held fast.
At last the third also came with the like intent, and the othersscreamed out, keep away, for goodness, sake keep away.  But she didnot understand why she was to keep away.  The others are there, shethought, I may as well be there too, and ran to them, but as soon asshe had touched her sister, she remained sticking fast to her.  Sothey had to spend the night with the goose.
The next morning Dummling took the goose under his arm and set out,without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging onto it.  They were obliged to run after him continually, now left, nowright, wherever his legs took him.
In the middle of the fields the parson met them, and when he saw theprocession he said, for shame, you good-for-nothing girls, why areyou running across the fields after this young man.  Is that seemly?At the same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pullher away, but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast, andwas himself obliged to run behind.
Before long the sexton came by and saw his master, the parson,running behind three girls.  He was astonished at this and calledout, hi, your reverence, whither away so quickly.  Do not forget thatwe have a christening to-day, and running after him he took him bythe sleeve, but was also held fast to it. Whilst the five weretrotting thus one behind the other, two laborers came with their hoesfrom the fields, the parson called out to them and begged that theywould set him and the sexton free.  But they had scarcely touched thesexton when they were held fast, and now there were seven of themrunning behind Dummling and the goose.
Soon afterwards he came to a city, where a king ruled who had adaughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh.  So hehad put forth a decree that whosoever should be able to make herlaugh should marry her.  When Dummling heard this, he went with hisgoose and all her train before the king's daughter, and as soon asshe saw the seven people running on and on, one behind the other, shebegan to laugh quite loudly, and as if she would never stop.
Thereupon Dummling asked to have her for his wife, but the king didnot like the son-in-law, and made all manner of excuses and said hemust first produce a man who could drink a cellarful of wine.
Dummling thought of the little grey man, who could certainly helphim, so he went into the forest, and in the same place where he hadfelled the tree, he saw a man sitting, who had a very sorrowful face.Dummling asked him what he was taking to heart so sorely, and heanswered, I have such a great thirst and cannot quench it, cold waterI cannot stand, a barrel of wine I have just emptied, but that to meis like a drop on a hot stone.
There, I can help you, said Dummling, just come with me and you shallbe satisfied.
He led him into the king's cellar, and the man bent over the hugebarrels, and drank and drank till his loins hurt, and before the daywas out he had emptied all the barrels.  Then Dummling asked oncemore for his bride, but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow,whom everyone called Dummling, should take away his daughter, and hemade a new condition, he must first find a man who could eat a wholemountain of bread.  Dummling did not think long, but went straightinto the forest, where in the same place there sat a man who wastying up his body with a strap, and making an awful face, and saying,I have eaten a whole ovenful of rolls, but what good is that when onehas such a hunger as I.  My stomach remains empty, and I must tiemyself up if I am not to die of hunger.
At this Dummling was glad, and said, get up and come with me, youshall eat yourself full.  He led him to the king's palace, where allthe flour in the whole kingdom was collected, and from it he caused ahuge mountain of bread to be baked.  The man from the forest stoodbefore it, began to eat, and by the end of one day the whole mountainhad vanished.  Then Dummling for the third time asked for his bride,but the king again sought a way out, and ordered a ship which couldsail on land and on water.  As soon as you come sailing back in it,said he, you shall have my daughter for wife.
Dummling went straight into the forest, and there sat the little greyman to whom he had given his cake.  When he heard what Dummlingwanted, he said, since you have given me to eat and to drink, I willgive you the ship, and I do all this because you once were kind tome.  Then he gave him the ship which could sail on land and water,and when the king saw that, he could no longer prevent him fromhaving his daughter.  The wedding was celebrated, and after theking's death, Dummling inherited his kingdom and lived for a longtime contentedly with his wife.	Allerleirauh
There was once upon a time a king who had a wife with golden hair,and she was so beautiful that her equal was not to be found on earth.It came to pass that she lay ill, and as she felt that she must soondie, she called the king and said, if you wish to marry again aftermy death, take no one who is not quite as beautiful as I am, and whohas not just such golden hair as I have, this you must promise me.And after the king had promised her this she closed her eyes anddied.
For a long time the king could not be comforted, and had no thoughtof taking another wife.  At length his councillors said, this cannotgo on.  The king must marry again, that we may have a queen.  And nowmessengers were sent about far and wide, to seek a bride who equalledthe late queen in beauty.  In the whole world, however, none was tobe found, and even if one had been found, still there would have beenno one who had such golden hair.  So the messengers came home as theywent.
Now the king had a daughter, who was just as beautiful as her deadmother, and had the same golden hair.  When she was grown up the kinglooked at her one day, and saw that in every respect she was like hislate wife, and suddenly felt a violent love for her.  Then he spoketo his councillors, I will marry my daughter, for she is thecounterpart of my late wife, otherwise I can find no bride whoresembles her.  When the councillors heard that, they were shocked,and said, God has forbidden a father to marry his daughter.  No goodcan come from such a crime, and the kingdom will be involved in theruin.
The daughter was still more shocked when she became aware of herfather's resolution, but hoped to turn him from his design. Then shesaid to him, before I fulfil your wish, I must have three dresses,one as golden as the sun, one as silvery as the moon, and one asbright as the stars, besides this, I wish for a mantle of a thousanddifferent kinds of fur and peltry joined together, and one of everykind of animal in your kingdom must give a piece of his skin for it.For she thought, to get that will be quite impossible, and thus Ishall divert my father from his wicked intentions.  The king,however, did not give it up, and the cleverest maidens in his kingdomhad to weave the three dresses, one as golden as the sun, one assilvery as the moon, and one as bright as the stars, and his huntsmenhad to catch one of every kind of animal in the whole of his kingdom,and take from it a piece of its skin, and out of these was made amantle of a thousand different kinds of fur.  At length, when all wasready, the king caused the mantle to be brought, spread it out beforeher, and said, the wedding shall be tomorrow.
When, therefore, the king's daughter saw that there was no longer anyhope of turning her father's heart, she resolved to run away.  In thenight whilst every one was asleep, she got up, and took threedifferent things from her treasures, a golden ring, a goldenspinning-wheel, and a golden reel.  The three dresses of the sun,moon, and stars she placed into a nutshell, put on her mantle of allkinds of fur, and blackened her face and hands with soot.  Then shecommended herself to God, and went away, and walked the whole nightuntil she reached a great forest.  And as she was tired, she got intoa hollow tree, and fell asleep.
The sun rose, and she slept on, and she was still sleeping when itwas full day.  Then it so happened that the king to whom this forestbelonged, was hunting in it.  When his dogs came to the tree, theysniffed, and ran barking round about it.  The king said to thehuntsmen, just see what kind of wild beast has hidden itself inthere.  The huntsmen obeyed his order, and when they came back theysaid, a wondrous beast is lying in the hollow tree, we have neverbefore seen one like it.  Its skin is fur of a thousand differentkinds, but it is lying asleep.  Said the king, see if you can catchit alive, and then fasten it to the carriage, and we will take itwith us.  When the huntsmen laid hold of the maiden, she awoke fullof terror, and cried to them, I am a poor child, deserted by fatherand mother, have pity on me, and take me with you.  Then said they,Allerleirauh, you will be useful in the kitchen, come with us, andyou can sweep up the ashes.  So they put her in the carriage, andtook her home to the royal palace.  There they pointed out to her acloset under the stairs, where no daylight entered, and said, hairyanimal, there you can live and sleep.  Then she was sent into thekitchen, and there she carried wood and water, swept the hearth,plucked the fowls, picked the vegetables, raked the ashes, and didall the dirty work.
Allerleirauh lived there for a long time in great wretchedness. Alas,fair princess, what is to become of you now.  It happened, however,that one day a feast was held in the palace, and she said to thecook, may I go upstairs for a while, and look on.  I will placemyself outside the door.  The cook answered, yes, go, but you must beback here in half-an-hour to sweep the hearth.
Then she took her oil-lamp, went into her den, put off her dress offur, and washed the soot off her face and hands, so that her fullbeauty once more came to light.  And she opened the nut, and took outher dress which shone like the sun, and when she had done that shewent up to the festival, and every one made way for her, for no oneknew her, and thought no otherwise than that she was a king'sdaughter.  The king came to meet her, gave his hand to her, anddanced with her, and thought in his heart, my eyes have never yetseen any one so beautiful.  When the dance was over she curtsied, andwhen the king looked round again she had vanished, and none knewwhither.  The guards who stood outside the palace were called andquestioned, but no one had seen her.
She had run into her little den, however, there quickly taken off herdress, made her face and hands black again, put on the mantle of fur,and again was Allerleirauh.  And now when she went into the kitchen,and was about to get to her work and sweep up the ashes, the cooksaid, leave that alone till morning, and make me the soup for theking, I, too, will go upstairs awhile, and take a look, but let nohairs fall in, or in future you shall have nothing to eat.  So thecook went away, and Allerleirauh made the soup for the king, and madebread soup and the best she could, and when it was ready she fetchedher golden ring from her little den, and put it in the bowl in whichthe soup was served.  When the dancing was over, the king had hissoup brought and ate it, and he liked it so much that it seemed tohim he had never tasted better.  But when he came to the bottom ofthe bowl, he saw a golden ring lying, and could not conceive how itcould have got there.  Then he ordered the cook to appear before him.The cook was terrified when he heard the order, and said toAllerleirauh, you have certainly let a hair fall into the soup, andif you have, you shall be beaten for it.
When he came before the king the latter asked who had made the soup.The cook replied, I made it.  But the king said, that is not true,for it was much better than usual, and cooked differently.  Heanswered, I must acknowledge that I did not make it, it was made bythe hairy animal.  The king said, go and bid it come up here.
When Allerleirauh came, the king said, who are you.  I am a poor girlwho no longer has any father or mother.  He asked further, of whatuse are you in my palace.  She answered, I am good for nothing but tohave boots thrown at my head.  He continued, where did you get thering which was in the soup.  She answered, I know nothing about thering.  So the king could learn nothing, and had to send her awayagain.
After a while, there was another festival, and then, as before,Allerleirauh begged the cook for leave to go and look on.  Heanswered, yes, but come back again in half-an-hour, and make the kingthe bread soup which he so much likes.  Then she ran into her den,washed herself quickly, and took out of the nut the dress which wasas silvery as the moon, and put it on.  Then she went up and was likea princess, and the king stepped forward to meet her, and rejoiced tosee her once more, and as the dance was just beginning they danced ittogether.  But when it was ended, she again disappeared so quicklythat the king could not observe where she went.  She, however, spranginto her den, and once more made herself a hairy animal, and wentinto the kitchen to prepare the bread soup.  When the cook had goneupstairs, she fetched the little golden spinning-wheel, and put it inthe bowl so that the soup covered it.  Then it was taken to the king,who ate it, and liked it as much as before, and had the cook brought,who this time likewise was forced to confess that Allerleirauh hadprepared the soup.  Allerleirauh again came before the king, but sheanswered that she was good for nothing else but to have boots thrownat her head, and that she knew nothing at all about the little goldenspinning-wheel.
When, for the third time, the king held a festival, all happened justas it had done before.  The cook said, fur-skin, you are a witch, andalways put something in the soup which makes it so good that the kinglikes it better than that which I cook, but as she begged so hard, helet her go up at the appointed time.  And now she put on the dresswhich shone like the stars, and thus entered the hall.  Again theking danced with the beautiful maiden, and thought that she never yethad been so beautiful.
And whilst she was dancing, he contrived, without her noticing it, toslip a golden ring on her finger, and he had given orders that thedance should last a very long time.  When it was ended, he wanted tohold her fast by her hands, but she tore herself loose, and sprangaway so quickly through the crowd that she vanished from his sight.She ran as fast as she could into her den beneath the stairs, but asshe had been too long, and had stayed more than half-an-hour shecould not take off her pretty dress, but only threw over it hermantle of fur, and in her haste she did not make herself quite black,but one finger remained white.  Then Allerleirauh ran into thekitchen, and cooked the bread soup for the king, and as the cook wasaway, put her golden reel into it.
When the king found the reel at the bottom of it, he causedAllerleirauh to be summoned, and then he espied the white finger, andsaw the ring which he had put on it during the dance.  Then hegrasped her by the hand, and held her fast, and when she wanted torelease herself and run away, her mantle of fur opened a little, andthe star-dress shone forth.  The king clutched the mantle and tore itoff.  Then her golden hair shone forth, and she stood there in fullsplendor, and could no longer hide herself.  And when she had washedthe soot and ashes from her face, she was more beautiful than anyonewho had ever been seen on earth.  But the king said, you are my dearbride, and we will never more part from each other. Thereupon themarriage was solemnized, and they lived happily until their death.There was once a woman and her daughter who lived in apretty garden with cabbages.  And a little hare came into it,and during the winter time ate all the cabbages.  Then says themother to the daughter, go into the garden, and chase the hare away.
The girl says to the little hare, sh-sh, hare, you will be eatingall our cabbages.  Says the hare, come, maiden, and seat yourselfon my little hare's tail, and come with me into mylittle hare's hut.  The girl will not do it.
Next day the harecomes again and eats the cabbages, then says the mother to thedaughter, go into the garden, and drive the hare away.  The girlsays to the hare, sh-sh, little hare, you will be eating all thecabbages.  The little hare says, maiden, seat yourself on mylittle hare's tail, and come with me into my little hare's hut.The maiden refuses.
The third day the hare comes again, and eatsthe cabbages.  On this the mother says to the daughter, go intothe garden, and hunt the hare away.  Says the maiden, sh-sh, littlehare, you will be eating all our cabbages.  Says the littlehare, come, maiden, seat yourself on my little hare's tail,and come with me into my little hare's hut.
The girl seatsherself on the little hare's tail, and then the hare takes herfar away to his little hut, and says, now cook green cabbage andmillet-seed, and I will invite the wedding-guests.  Then allthe wedding-guests assembled.  Who were the wedding-guests?That I can tell you as another told it to me.  They were allhares, and the crow was there as parson to marry the brideand bridegroom, and the fox as clerk, and the altar was underthe rainbow.
The girl, however, was sad, for she was all alone.  The little harecomes and says, open the doors, open the doors, the wedding-guestsare merry.  The bride says nothing, but weeps.  The littlehare goes away.  The little hare comes back and says, take offthe lid, take off the lid, the wedding-guests are hungry.  Thebride again says nothing, and weeps.  The little hare goes away.The little hare comes back and says, take off the lid, take offthe lid, the wedding-guests are waiting.  Then the bride saysnothing, and the hare goes away, but she dresses a straw-dollin her clothes, and gives her a spoon to stir with, and setsher by the pan with the millet-seed, and goes back to hermother.  The little hare comes once more and says, take offthe lid, take off the lid, and gets up, and strikes the dollon the head so that her cap falls off.Then the little hare sees that it is not his bride, and goesaway and is sorrowful.There was once a king's son who had a bride whom he loved very much.And when he was sitting beside her and very happy, news came that hisfather lay sick unto death, and desired to see him once again beforehis end.  Then he said to his beloved, I must now go and leave you, Igive you a ring as a remembrance of me.  When I am king, I willreturn and fetch you.
So he rode away, and when he reached his father, the latter wasdangerously ill, and near his death.  He said to him, dear son, Iwished to see you once again before my end, promise me to marry as Iwish, and he named a certain king's daughter who was to be his wife.The son was in such trouble that he did not think what he was doing,and said, yes, dear father, your will shall be done, and thereuponthe king shut his eyes, and died.
When therefore the son had been proclaimed king, and the time ofmourning was over, he was forced to keep the promise which he hadgiven his father, and caused the king's daughter to be asked inmarriage, and she was promised to him.  His first betrothed heard ofthis, and fretted so much about his faithlessness that she nearlydied.  Then her father said to her, dearest child, why are you sosad.  You shall have whatsoever you will.  She thought for a momentand said, dear father, I wish for eleven girls exactly like myself inface, figure, and size.  The father said, if it be possible, yourdesire shall be fulfilled, and he caused a search to be made in hiswhole kingdom, until eleven young maidens were found who exactlyresembled his daughter in face, figure, and size.
When they came to the king's daughter, she had twelve suits ofhuntsmen's clothes made, all alike, and the eleven maidens had to puton the huntsmen's clothes, and she herself put on the twelfth suit.
Thereupon she took leave of her father, and rode away with them, androde to the court of her former betrothed, whom she loved so dearly.Then she asked if he required any huntsmen, and if he would take allof them into his service.  The king looked at her and did not knowher, but as they were such handsome fellows, he said, yes, and thathe would willingly take them, and now they were the king's twelvehuntsmen.
The king, however, had a lion which was a wondrous animal, for heknew all concealed and secret things.  It came to pass that oneevening he said to the king, you think you have twelve huntsmen.Yes, said the king, they are twelve huntsmen. The lion continued, youare mistaken, they are twelve girls.
The king said, that cannot be true.  How will you prove that to me.Oh, just let some peas be strewn in the ante-chamber, answered sweredthe lion, and then you will soon see.  Men have a firm step, and whenthey walk over the peas none of them stir, but girls trip and skip,and drag their feet, and the peas roll about. The king was wellpleased with the counsel, and caused the peas to be strewn.
There was, however, a servant of the king's who favored the huntsmen,and when he heard that they were going to be put to this test he wentto them and repeated everything, and said, the lion wants to make theking believe that you are girls.  Then the king's daughter thankedhim, and said to her maidens, show some strength, and step firmly onthe peas.  So next morning when the king had the twelve huntsmencalled before him, and they came into the ante-chamber where the peaswere lying, they stepped so firmly on them, and had such a strong,sure walk, that not one of the peas either rolled or stirred.
Then they went away again, and the king said to the lion, you havelied to me, they walk just like men.  The lion said, they have beeninformed that they were going to be put to the test, and have assumedsome strength.  Just let twelve spinning-wheels be brought into theante-chamber, and they will go to them and be pleased with them, andthat is what no man would do.  The king liked the advice, and had thespinning-wheels placed in the ante-chamber.
But the servant, who was well disposed to the huntsmen, went to them,and disclosed the project.  So when they were alone the king'sdaughter said to her eleven girls, show some constraint, and do notlook round at the spinning-wheels.  And next morning when the kinghad his twelve huntsmen summoned, they went through the ante-chamber,and never once looked at the spinning wheels.
Then the king again said to the lion, you have deceived me, they aremen, for they have not looked at the spinning-wheels. The lionreplied, they have learnt that they were going to be put to the test,and have restrained themselves.  The king, however, would no longerbelieve the lion.
The twelve huntsmen always followed the king to the chase, and hisliking for them continually increased.  Now it came to pass that oncewhen they were hunting, news came that the king's bride wasapproaching.  When the true bride heard that, it hurt her so muchthat her heart was almost broken, and she fell fainting to theground.  The king thought something had happened to his dearhuntsman, ran up to him, wanted to help him, and drew his glove off.Then he saw the ring which he had given to his first bride, and whenhe looked in her face he recognized her.
Then his heart was so touched that he kissed her, and when she openedher eyes he said, you are mine, and I am yours, and no one in theworld can alter that.  He sent a messenger to the other bride, andentreated her to return to her own kingdom, for he had a wifealready, and someone who had found an old key did not require a newone.  Thereupon the wedding was celebrated, and the lion was againtaken into favor, because, after all, he had told the truth.Hans wished to put his son to learn a trade, so he went into thechurch and prayed to our Lord God to know which would be the mostsuitable for him.  Then the clerk got behind the altar, and said,thieving, thieving.  On this Hans goes back to his son, and tells himhe is to learn thieving, and that the Lord God had said so.  So hegoes with his son to seek a man who is acquainted with thieving.They walk a long time and come into a great forest, where stands alittle house with an old woman in it.  Hans says, do you know of aman who is acquainted with thieving.  You can learn that here quitewell, says the woman, my son is a master of it.  So he speaks withthe son, and asks if he knows thieving really well.  The master-thiefsays, I will teach him well.  Come back when a year is over, and thenif you recognize your son, I will take no payment at all for teachinghim, but if you don't know him, you must give me two hundred talers.
The father goes home again, and the son learns witchcraft andthieving, thoroughly.  When the year is out, the father is full ofanxiety to know how he shall recognize his son.  As he is thus goingabout in his trouble, he meets a little dwarf, who says, man, whatails you, that you are always in such trouble.
Oh, says Hans, a year ago I placed my son with a master-thief whotold me I was to come back when the year was out, and that if I thendid not know my son when I saw him, I was to pay two hundred talers,but if I did know him I was to pay nothing, and now I am afraid ofnot knowing him and can't tell where I am to get the money.  Then thedwarf tells him to take a crust of bread with him, and to standbeneath the chimney.  There on the cross-beam is a basket, out ofwhich a little bird is peeping, and that is your son.
Hans goes thither, and throws a crust of black bread in front of thebasket with the bird in it, and the little bird comes out, and looksup.  Hello, my son, are you here, says the father, and the son isdelighted to see his father, but the master-thief says, the devilmust have prompted you, or how could you have known your son.Father, let us go, said the youth.
Then the father and son set out homeward.  On the way a carriagecomes driving by.  Hereupon the son says to his father, I will changemyself into a large greyhound, and then you can earn a great deal ofmoney by me.  Then the gentleman calls from the carriage, my man,will you sell your dog.  Yes, says the father. How much do you wantfor it.  Thirty talers.  Well, man, that is a great deal, but as itis such a very fine dog I will have it. The gentleman takes it intohis carriage, but when they have driven a little farther the dogsprings out of the carriage through the window, and goes back to hisfather, and is no longer a greyhound.
They go home together.  Next day there is a fair in the neighboringtown, so the youth says to his father, I will now change myself intoa beautiful horse, and you can sell me, but when you have sold me,you must take off my bridle, or I cannot become a man again.  Thenthe father goes with the horse to the fair, and the master-thiefcomes and buys the horse for a hundred talers, but the fatherforgets, and does not take off the bridle.  So the man goes home withthe horse, and puts it in the stable.
When the maid crosses the threshold, the horse says, take off mybridle, take off my bridle. Then the maid stands still, and says,what, can you speak.  So she goes and takes the bridle off, and thehorse becomes a sparrow, and flies out at the door, and themaster-thief becomes a sparrow also, and flies after him.
Then they come together and cast lots again, and the master loses.So the master changes himself into a cock, and the youth becomes afox, and bites the master's head off, and he died and has remaineddead to this day.A father once called his three sons before him, and he gave to thefirst a cock, to the second a scythe, and to the third a cat.  I amalready aged, said he, my death is nigh, and I have wished to providefor you before my end, money I have not, and what I now give youseems of little worth, but all depends on your making a sensible useof it.  Only seek out a country where such things are still unknown,and your fortune is made.
After the father's death the eldest went away with his cock, butwherever he came the cock was already known, in the towns he saw himfrom a long distance, sitting upon the steeples and turning roundwith the wind, and in the villages he heard more than one crowing, noone would show any wonder at the creature, so that it did not look asif he would make his fortune by it.
At last, however, it happened that he came to an island where thepeople knew nothing about cocks, and did not even understand how todivide their time.  They certainly knew when it was morning orevening, but at night, if they did not sleep through it, not one ofthem knew how to find out the time.
Look. Said he, what a proud creature.  It has a ruby-red crown uponits head, and wears spurs like a knight, it calls you three timesduring the night, at fixed hours, and when it calls for the lasttime, the sun soon rises.  But if it crows by broad daylight, thentake notice, for there will certainly be a change of weather.
The people were well pleased, for a whole night they did not sleep,and listened with great delight as the cock at two, four, and sixo'clock, loudly and clearly proclaimed the time.  They asked if thecreature were for sale, and how much he wanted for it.  About as muchgold as an ass can carry, answered he.  A ridiculously small pricefor such a precious creature. They cried unanimously, and willinglygave him what he had asked.
When he came home with his wealth his brothers were astonished, andthe second said, well, I will go forth and see whether I cannot getrid of my scythe as profitably.  But it did not look as if he would,for laborers met him everywhere, and they had scythes upon theirshoulders as well as he.
At last, however, he chanced upon an island where the people knewnothing of scythes.  When the corn was ripe there, they took cannonout to the fields and shot it down.  Now this was rather an uncertainaffair, many shot right over it, others hit the ears instead of thestems, and shot them away, whereby much was lost, and besides allthis, it made a terrible noise.  So the man set to work and mowed itdown so quietly and quickly that the people opened their mouths withastonishment.  They agreed to give him what he wanted for the scythe,and he received a horse laden with as much gold as it could carry.
And now the third brother wanted to take his cat to the right man. Hefared just like the others, so long as he stayed on the mainlandthere was nothing to be done.  Every place had cats, and there wereso many of them that new-born kittens were generally drowned in theponds.
At last he sailed over to an island, and it luckily happened that nocats had ever yet been seen there, and that the mice had got theupper hand so much that they danced upon the tables and bencheswhether the master were at home or not.  The people complainedbitterly of the plague, the king himself in his palace did not knowhow to protect himself against them, mice squeaked in every corner,and gnawed whatever they could lay hold of with their teeth.
But now the cat began her chase, and soon cleared a couple of rooms,and the people begged the king to buy the wonderful beast for thecountry.  The king willingly gave what was asked, which was a muleladen with gold, and the third brother came home with the greatesttreasure of all.
The cat made herself merry with the mice in the royal palace, andkilled so many that they could not be counted.  At last she grew warmwith the work and thirsty, so she stood still, lifted up her head andcried, mew. Mew.
When they heard this strange cry, the king and all his people werefrightened, and in their terror ran all at once out of the palace.Then the king took counsel what was best to be done, at last it wasdetermined to send a herald to the cat, and demand that she shouldleave the palace, or if not, she was to expect that force would beused against her.  The councillors said, rather will we let ourselvesbe plagued with the mice, for to that misfortune we are accustomed,than give up our lives to such a monster as this.  A noble youth,therefore, was sent to ask the cat whether she would peaceably quitthe castle.  But the cat, whose thirst had become still greater,merely answered, mew. Mew.  The youth understood her to say, "Mostcertainly not. Most certainly not." And took this answer to the king.
Then, said the councillors, she shall yield to force. Cannon werebrought out, and the palace was soon in flames.  When the firereached the room where the cat was sitting, she sprang safely out ofthe window, but the besiegers did not leave off until the wholepalace was shot down to the ground.There was once a man who understood all kinds of arts.  He served inwar, and behaved well and bravely, but when the war was over hereceived his dismissal, and three farthings for his expenses on theway.  Wait, said he, I shall not be content with this. If I can onlymeet with the right people, the king will yet have to give me all thetreasure of the country.
Then full of anger he went into the forest, and saw a man standingtherein who had plucked up six trees as if they were blades of corn.He said to him, will you be my servant and go with me.  Yes, heanswered, but, first, I will take this little bundle of sticks hometo my mother, and he took one of the trees, and wrapped it round thefive others, lifted the bundle on his back, and carried it away. Thenhe returned and went with his master, who said, we two ought to beable to get through the world very well, and when they had walked onfor a short while they found a huntsman who was kneeling, hadshouldered his gun, and was about to fire.  The master said to him,huntsman, what are you going to shoot.  He answered, two miles fromhere a fly is sitting on the branch of an oak-tree, and I want toshoot its left eye out.
Oh, come with me, said the man, if we three are together, wecertainly ought to be able to get on in the world.  The huntsman wasready, and went with him, and they came to seven windmills whosesails were turning round with great speed, and yet no wind wasblowing either on the right or the left, and no leaf was stirring.Then said the man, I know not what is driving the windmills, not abreath of air is stirring, and he went onwards with his servants, andwhen they had walked two miles they saw a man sitting on a tree whowas shutting one nostril, and blowing out of the other.  Goodgracious.  What are you doing up there.
He answered, two miles from here are seven windmills.  Look, I amblowing them till they turn round.  Oh, come with me, said the man.If we four are together, we shall carry the whole world before us.Then the blower came down and went with him, and after a while theysaw a man who was standing on one leg and had taken off the other,and laid it beside him.  Then the master said, you have arrangedthings very comfortably to have a rest.
I am a runner, he replied, and to stop myself running far too fast, Ihave taken off one of my legs, for if I run with both, I go quickerthan any bird can fly.  Oh, go with me.  If we five are together, weshall carry the whole world before us.
So he went with them, and it was not long before they met a man whowore a cap, but wore it entirely over one ear.  Then the master saidto him, gracefully, gracefully, don't stick your cap on one ear, youlook just like a tom-fool.  I must not wear it otherwise, said he,for if I set my hat straight, a terrible frost comes on, and all thebirds in the air are frozen, and drop dead on the ground.  Oh, comewith me, said the master. If we six are together, we can carry thewhole world before us.
Now the six came to a town where the king had proclaimed thatwhosoever ran a race with his daughter and won the victory, should beher husband, but whosoever lost it, must lose his head.  Then the manpresented himself and said, I will, however, let my servant run forme.  The king replied, then his life also must be staked, so that hishead and yours are both set on the victory.  When that was settledand made secure, the man buckled the other leg on the runner, andsaid to him, now be nimble, and help us to win.  It was fixed thatthe one who was first to bring some water from a far distant well wasto be the victor.  The runner received a pitcher, and the king'sdaughter one too, and they began to run at the same time, but in aninstant, when the king's daughter had got a very little way, thepeople who were looking on could see no more of the runner, and itwas just as if the wind had whistled by.  In a short time he reachedthe well, filled his pitcher with water, and turned back.  Half-wayhome, however, he was overcome with fatigue, and set his pitcherdown, lay down himself, and fell asleep.  But he had made a pillow ofa horse's skull which was lying on the ground, in order that he mightlie uncomfortably, and soon wake up again.  In the meantime theking's daughter, who could also run very well - quite as well as anyordinary mortal can - had reached the well, and was hurrying backwith her pitcher full of water, and when she saw the runner lyingthere asleep, she was glad and said, my enemy is delivered over intomy hands, emptied his pitcher, and ran on.  And now all would havebeen lost if by good luck the huntsman had not been standing at thetop of the castle, and had not seen everything with his sharp eyes.
Then said he, the king's daughter shall still not prevail against us.And he loaded his gun, and shot so cleverly, that he shot the horse'sskull away from under the runner's head without hurting him.  Thenthe runner awoke, leapt up, and saw that his pitcher was empty, andthat the king's daughter was already far in advance.  He did not loseheart, however, but ran back to the well with his pitcher, again drewsome water, and was at home again even ten minutes before the king'sdaughter.  Behold, said he, only now have I begun to use my legs.What I did before did not deserve to be called running.
But it pained the king, and still more his daughter, that she shouldbe carried off by a common discharged soldier like that. So they tookcounsel with each other how to get rid of him and his companions.Then said the king to her, I have thought of a way.  Don't be afraid,they shall not come back again.  And he said to them, you shall nowmake merry together, and eat and drink, and he conducted them to aroom which had a floor of iron, and the doors also were of iron, andthe windows were guarded with iron bars.  There was a table in theroom covered with delicious food, and the king said to them, go in,and enjoy yourselves.  And when they were inside, he ordered thedoors to be shut and bolted.  Then he sent for the cook, andcommanded him to make a fire under the room until the iron becamered-hot.
This the cook did, and the six who were sitting at table began tofeel quite warm, and they thought the heat was caused by the food.But as it became still greater, and they wanted to get out, and foundthat the doors and windows were bolted, they became aware that theking must have an evil intention, and wanted to suffocate them.  Heshall not succeed, however, said the one with the cap.  I will causea frost to come, before which the fire shall be ashamed, and creepaway.
Then he put his cap on straight, and immediately there came such afrost that all heat disappeared, and the food on the dishes began tofreeze.  When an hour or two had passed by, and the king believedthat they had perished in the heat, he had the doors opened to beholdthem himself.  But when the doors were opened, all six were standingthere, alive and well, and said that they should very much like toget out to warm themselves, for the very food was fast frozen to thedishes with the cold.  Then, full of anger, the king went down to thecook, scolded him, and asked why he had not done what he had beenordered to do.  But the cook replied, there is heat enough there,just look yourself. Then the king saw that a fierce fire was burningunder the iron room, and perceived that there was no getting thebetter of the six in this way.
Again the king considered how to get rid of his unpleasant guests,and caused their chief to be brought and said, if you will take goldand renounce my daughter, you shall have as much as you will.
Oh, yes, lord king, he answered, give me as much as my servant cancarry, and I will not ask for your daughter.
On this the king was satisfied, and the other continued, in fourteendays, I will come and fetch it.  Thereupon he summoned together allthe tailors in the whole kingdom, and they were to sit for fourteendays and sew a sack.  And when it was ready, the strong one who couldtear up trees had to take it on his back, and go with it to the king.Then said the king, who can that strong fellow be who is carrying abundle of linen on his back that is as big as a house.  And he wasalarmed and said, what a lot of gold he can carry away.  Then hecommanded a ton of gold to be brought, which took sixteen of hisstrongest men to carry, but the strong one snatched it up in onehand, put it in his sack, and said, why don't you bring more at thesame time.  That hardly covers the bottom.  Then, little by little,the king caused all his treasure to be brought thither, and thestrong one pushed it into the sack, and still the sack was not halffull with it.  Bring more, cried he, these few crumbs don't fill it.
Then seven thousand carts with gold had to be gathered together inthe whole kingdom, and the strong one thrust them and the oxenharnessed to them into his sack.  I will examine it no longer, saidhe, but will just take what comes, so long as the sack is but full.When all that was inside, there was still room for a great deal more.Then he said, I will just make an end of the thing.  People dosometimes tie up a sack even when it is not full.  So he took it onhis back, and went away with his comrades.  When the king now saw howone single man was carrying away the entire wealth of the country, hebecame enraged, and bade his horsemen mount and pursue the six, andordered them to take the sack away from the strong one.  Tworegiments speedily overtook the six, and called out, you areprisoners, put down the sack with the gold, or you will be cut topieces.  What say you, cried the blower, that we are prisoners.
Rather than that should happen, all of you shall dance about in theair.  And he closed one nostril, and with the other blew on the tworegiments.  Then they were driven away from each other, and carriedinto the blue sky over all the mountains, one here, the other there.One sergeant cried for mercy.  He had nine wounds, and was a bravefellow who did not deserve ill treatment.
The blower stopped a little so that he came down without injury, andthen the blower said to him.  Now go home to your king, and tell himhe had better send some more horsemen, and I will blow them all intothe air.  When the king was informed of this he said, let the rascalsgo.  There is magic in them.  Then the six conveyed the riches home,divided it amongst them, and lived in content until their death.The she-wolf brought into the world a young one, and invited the foxto be godfather.  After all, he is a near relative of ours, said she,he has a good understanding, and much talent, he can instruct mylittle son, and help him forward in the world.  The fox, too,appeared quite honest, and said, worthy mrs. Gossip, I thank you forthe honor which you are doing me, I will, however, conduct myself insuch a way that you shall be repaid for it.  He enjoyed himself atthe feast, and made merry, afterwards he said, dear mrs. Gossip, itis our duty to take care of the child, it must have good food that itmay be strong.  I know a sheep-fold from which we might fetch a nicemorsel.  The wolf was pleased with the idea, and she went out withthe fox to the farmyard.  He pointed out the fold from afar, andsaid, you will be able to creep in there without being seen, and inthe meantime I will look about on the other side to see if I can pickup a chicken.  He, however, did not go there, but sat down at theentrance to the forest, stretched his legs and rested.
The she-wolf crept into the stable.  A dog was lying there, and itmade such a noise that the peasants came running out, caught gossipwolf, and poured a strong burning mixture, which had been preparedfor washing, over her skin.  At last she escaped, and dragged herselfoutside.  There lay the fox, who pretended to be full of complaints,and said, ah, dear mrs. Gossip, how ill I have fared, the peasantshave fallen on me, and have broken every limb I have, if you do notwant me to lie where I am and perish, you must carry me away.  Theshe-wolf herself was only able to walk slowly, but she was in suchconcern about the fox that she took him on her back, and slowlycarried him who was perfectly safe and sound to her house.  Then thefox cried to her, farewell, dear mrs. Gossip, may the roasting youhave had do you good, laughed heartily at her, and bounded off.There was once upon a time a queen to whom God had given no children.Every morning she went into the garden and prayed to God in heaven tobestow on her a son or a daughter.  Then an angel from heaven came toher and said, be at rest, you shall have a son with the power ofwishing, so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for, that shall hehave.  Then she went to the king, and told him the joyful tidings,and when the time was come she gave birth to a son, and the king wasfilled with gladness.
Every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wildbeasts were kept, and washed herself there in a clear stream.  Ithappened once when the child was a little older, that it was lying inher arms and she fell asleep.  Then came the old cook, who knew thatthe child had the power of wishing, and stole it away, and he took ahen, and cut it in pieces, and dropped some of its blood on thequeen's apron and on her dress.  Then he carried the child away to asecret place, where a nurse was obliged to suckle it, and he ran tothe king and accused the queen of having allowed her child to betaken from her by the wild beasts.  When the king saw the blood onher apron, he believed this, fell into such a passion that he ordereda high tower to be built, in which neither sun nor moon could beseen, and had his wife put into it, and walled up.  Here she was tostay for seven years without meat or drink, and die of hunger.  ButGod sent two angels from heaven in the shape of white doves, whichflew to her twice a day, and carried her food until the seven yearswere over.
The cook, however, thought to himself, if the child has the power ofwishing, and I am here, he might very easily get me into trouble.  Sohe left the palace and went to the boy, who was already big enough tospeak, and said to him, wish for a beautiful palace for yourself witha garden, and all else that pertains to it.  Scarcely were the wordsout of the boy's mouth, when everything was there that he had wishedfor.  After a while the cook said to him, it is not well for you tobe so alone, wish for a pretty girl as a companion.  Then the king'sson wished for one, and she immediately stood before him, and wasmore beautiful than any painter could have painted her.
The two played together, and loved each other with all their hearts,and the old cook went out hunting like a nobleman.  The thoughtoccurred to him, however, that the king's son might some day wish tobe with his father, and thus bring him into great peril.  So he wentout and took the maiden aside, and said, to-night when the boy isasleep, go to his bed and plunge this knife into his heart, and bringme his heart and tongue, and if you do not do it, you shall lose yourlife.
Thereupon he went away, and when he returned next day she had notdone it, and said, why should I shed the blood of an innocent boy whohas never harmed anyone.  The cook once more said, if you do not doit, it shall cost you your own life.
When he had gone away, she had a little hind brought to her, andordered her to be killed, and took her heart and tongue, and laidthem on a plate, and when she saw the old man coming, she said to theboy, lie down in your bed, and draw the clothes over you.  Then thewicked wretch came in and said, where are the boy's heart and tongue.The girl reached the plate to him, but the king's son threw off thequilt, and said, you old sinner, why did you want to kill me.  Nowwill I pronounce thy sentence.  You shall become a black poodle andhave a gold collar round your neck, and shall eat burning coals, tillthe flames burst forth from your throat.  And when he had spokenthese words, the old man was changed into a poodle dog, and had agold collar round his neck, and the cooks were ordered to bring upsome live coals, and these he ate, until the flames broke forth fromhis throat.
The king's son remained there a short while longer, and he thought ofhis mother, and wondered if she were still alive.  At length he saidto the maiden, I will go home to my own country, if you will go withme, I will provide for you.
Ah, she replied, the way is so long, and what shall I do in a strangeland where I am unknown.  As she did not seem quite willing, and asthey could not be parted from each other, he wished that she might bechanged into a beautiful pink, and took her with him.  Then he wentaway to his own country, and the poodle had to run after him.
He went to the tower in which his mother was confined, and as it wasso high, he wished for a ladder which would reach up to the very top.Then he mounted up and looked inside, and cried, beloved mother, ladyqueen, are you still alive, or are you dead.  She answered, I havejust eaten, and am still satisfied, for she thought the angels werethere.  Said he, I am your dear son, whom the wild beasts were saidto have torn from your arms, but I am alive still, and will soon setyou free.
Then he descended again, and went to his father, and caused himselfto be ammounced as a strange huntsman, and asked if he could offerhim service.  The king said yes, if he was skilful and could get gamefor him, he should come to him, but that deer had never taken uptheir quarters in any part of the district or country.  Then thehuntsman promised to procure as much game for him as he couldpossibly use at the royal table.  So he summoned all the huntsmentogether, and bade them go out into the forest with him.  And he wentwith them and made them form a great circle, open at one end where hestationed himself, and began to wish.
Two hundred deer and more came running inside the circle at once, andthe huntsmen shot them.  Then they were all placed on sixty countrycarts, and driven home to the king, and for once he was able to deckhis table with game, after having had none at all for years.
Now the king felt great joy at this, and commanded that his entirehousehold should eat with him next day, and made a great feast. Whenthey were all assembled together, he said to the huntsmen, as you areso clever, you shall sit by me.  He replied, lord king, your majestymust excuse me, I am a poor huntsman.  But the king insisted on it,and said, you shall sit by me, until he did it. Whilst he was sittingthere, he thought of his dearest mother, and wished that one of theking's principal servants would begin to speak of her, and would askhow it was faring with the queen in the tower, and if she were alivestill, or had perished.
Hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began, and said, yourmajesty, we live joyously here, but how is the queen living in thetower.  Is she still alive, or has she died?  But the king replied,she let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts, I will not haveher named.  Then the huntsman arose and said, gracious lord father,she is alive still, and I am her son, and I was not carried away bywild beasts, but by that wretch the old cook, who tore me from herarms when she was asleep, and sprinkled her apron with the blood of achicken.
Thereupon he took the dog with the golden collar, and said, that isthe wretch, and caused live coals to be brought, and these the dogwas compelled to devour before the sight of all, until flames burstforth from its throat.  On this the huntsman asked the king if hewould like to see the dog in his true shape, and wished him back intothe form of the cook, in the which he stood immediately, with hiswhite apron, and his knife by his side.  When the king saw him hefell into a passion, and ordered him to be cast into the deepestdungeon.
Then the huntsman spoke further and said, father, will you see themaiden who brought me up so tenderly and who was afterwards to murderme, but did not do it, though her own life depended on it.  The kingreplied, yes, I would like to see her.  The son said, most graciousfather, I will show her to you in the form of a beautiful flower, andhe thrust his hand into his pocket and brought forth the pink, andplaced it on the royal table, and it was so beautiful that the kinghad never seen one to equal it.  Then the son said, now will I showher to you in her own form, and wished that she might become amaiden, and she stood there looking so beautiful that no paintercould have made her look more so.
And the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into thetower, to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table. But whenwhe was led in she ate nothing, and said, the gracious and mercifulGod who has supported me in the tower, will soon set me free.  Shelived three days more, and then died happily, and when she wasburied, the two white doves which had brought her food to the tower,and were angels of heaven, followed her body and seated themselves onher grave.  The aged king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces,but grief consumed the king's own heart, and he soon died.  His sonmarried the beautiful maiden whom he had brought with him as a flowerin his pocket, and whether they are still alive or not, is known toGod.There was once a very old man, whose eyes had become dim, his earsdull of hearing, his knees trembled, and when he sat at table hecould hardly hold the spoon, and spilt the broth upon the table-clothor let it run out of his mouth.  His son and his son's wife weredisgusted at this, so the old grandfather at last had to sit in thecorner behind the stove, and they gave him his food in an earthenwarebowl, and not even enough of it.  And he used to look towards thetable with his eyes full of tears.
Once, too, his trembling hands could not hold the bowl, and it fellto the ground and broke.  The young wife scolded him, but he saidnothing and only sighed.  Then they bought him a wooden bowl for afew half-pence, out of which he had to eat.
They were once sitting thus when the little grandson of four yearsold began to gather together some bits of wood upon the ground.  Whatare you doing there, asked the father.  I am making a little trough,answered the child, for father and mother to eat out of when I ambig.
The man and his wife looked at each other for a while, and presentlybegan to cry.  Then they took the old grandfather to the table, andhenceforth always let him eat with them, and likewise said nothing ifhe did spill a little of anything.A little brother and sister were once playing by a well, and whilethey were thus playing, they both fell in.  A water-nixie lived downbelow, who said, now I have got you, now you shall work hard for me,and carried them off with her.  She gave the girl dirty tangled flaxto spin, and she had to fetch water in a bucket with a hole in it,and the boy had to hew down a tree with a blunt axe, and they gotnothing to eat but dumplings as hard as stones.
Then at last the children became so impatient, that they waited untilone sunday, when the nixie was at church, and ran away.  But whenchurch was over, the nixie saw that the birds were flown, andfollowed them with great strides.  The children saw her from afar,and the girl threw a brush behind her which formed an immense hill ofbristles, with thousands and thousands of spikes, over which thenixie was forced to scramble with great difficulty, at last, however,she got over.
When the children saw this, the boy threw behind him a comb whichmade a great ridge with a thousand times a thousand teeth, but thenixie managed to keep herself steady on them, and at last crossedover.  Then the girl threw behind her a looking-glass which formed ahill of mirrors, and was so slippery that it was impossible for thenixie to cross it.  Then she thought, I will go home quickly andfetch my axe, and cut the hill of glass in half.  Long before shereturned, however, and had hewn through the glass, the children hadescaped to a great distance, and the water-nixie was obliged totrundle back to her well again.
There was one upon a time a great war, and when it came to an end,many soldiers were discharged.  Then brother lustig also received hisdismissal, and with it nothing but a small loaf of ammunition-bread,and four kreuzers in money, with which he departed.
St. Peter, however, had placed himself in his way in the form of apoor beggar, and when brother lustig came up, he begged alms of him.Brother lustig replied, dear beggar-man, what am I to give you.  Ihave been a soldier, and have received my dismissal, and have nothingbut this little loaf of ammunition-bread, and four kreuzers of money.When that is gone, I shall have to beg as well as you.  Still I willgive you something.
Thereupon he divided the loaf into four parts, and gave the apostleone of them, and a kreuzer likewise.  St. Peter thanked him, wentonwards, and threw himself again in the soldier's way as a beggar,but in another shape, and when he came up begged a gift of him asbefore.
Brother lustig spoke as he had done before, and again gave him aquarter of the loaf and one kreuzer.  St. Peter thanked him, and wentonwards, but for the third time placed himself in another shape as abeggar in the road, and spoke to brother lustig. Brother lustig gavehim also the third quarter of bread and the third kreuzer.  St. Peterthanked him, and brother lustig went onwards, and had but a quarterof the loaf, and one kreuzer.
With that he went into an inn, ate the bread, and ordered onekreuzer's worth of beer.  When he had had it, he journeyed onwards,and then St. Peter, who had assumed the appearance of a dischargedsoldier, met and spoke to him thus.  Good day, comrade, can you notgive me a bit of bread, and a kreuzer to get a drink.  Where am I toprocure it, answered brother lustig. I have been discharged, and Igot nothing but a loaf of ammunition-bread and four kreuzers inmoney.  I met three beggars on the road, and I gave each of them aquarter of my bread, and one kreuzer.  The last quarter I ate in theinn, and had a drink with the last kreuzer.  Now my pockets areempty, and if you also have nothing we can go a-begging together.
No, answered St. Peter, we need not quite do that.  I know a littleabout medicine, and I will soon earn as much as I require by that.Indeed, said brother lustig, I know nothing of that, so I must go andbeg alone.  Just come with me, said St. Peter, and if I earnanything, you shall have half of it.
All right, said brother lustig, and they went away together. Thenthey came to a peasant's house inside which they heard loudlamentations and cries.  So they went in, and there the husband waslying sick unto death, and very near his end, and his wife was cryingand weeping quite loudly.  Stop that howling and crying, said St.Peter, I will make the man well again, and he took a salve out of hispocket, and healed the sick man in a moment, so that he could get up,and was in perfect health.
In great delight the man and his wife said, how can we reward you.What shall we give you.  But St. Peter would take nothing, and themore the peasant folks offered him, the more he refused.  Brotherlustig, however, nudged St. Peter, and said, take something.  Sureenough we are in need of it.
At length the woman brought a lamb and said to St. Peter that hereally must take that, but he would not. Then brother lustig gave hima poke in the side, and said, do take it, you stupid fool.  We are ingreat want of it.  Then St. Peter said at last, well, I will take thelamb, but I won't carry it.  If you insist on having it, you mustcarry it.  That is nothing, said brother lustig.  I will easily carryit, and took it on his shoulder.
Then they departed and came to a wood, but brother lustig had begunto feel the lamb heavy, and he was hungry, so he said to St. Peter,look, that's a good place, we might cook the lamb there, and eat it.As you like, answered St. Peter, but I can't have anything to do withthe cooking.  If you will cook, there is a kettle for you, and in themeantime I will walk about a little until it is ready.  But you mustnot begin to eat until I have come back.  I will come at the righttime.  Well, go, then, said brother lustig.  I understand cookery, Iwill manage it.
Then St. Peter went away, and brother lustig killed the lamb, lighteda fire, threw the meat into the kettle, and boiled it.  When thelamb, however, was quite ready, and the apostle peter had not comeback, brother lustig took it out of the kettle, cut it up, and foundthe heart. That is said to be the best part, said he, and tasted it,but at last he ate it all up.  At length St. Peter returned and said,you may eat the whole of the lamb yourself, I will only have theheart, give me that.
Then brother lustig took a knife and fork, and pretended to lookanxiously about amongst the lamb's flesh, but not to be able to findthe heart, and at last he said abruptly, there is none here.  Butwhere can it be, said the apostle.  I don't know, replied brotherlustig, but look, what fools we both are, to seek for the lamb'sheart, and neither of us to remember that a lamb has no heart.  Oh,said St. Peter, that is something quite new.  Every animal has aheart, why is a lamb to have none.  No, be assured, my brother, saidbrother lustig, that a lamb has no heart.  Just consider itseriously, and then you will see that it really has none.  Well, itis all right, said St. Peter.  If there is no heart, then I want noneof the lamb.  You may eat it alone.
What I can't eat now, I will carry away in my knapsack, said brotherlustig, and he ate half the lamb, and put the rest in his knapsack.
They went farther, and then St. Peter caused a great stream of waterto flow right across their path, and they were obliged to passthrough it.  Said St. Peter, do you go first.  No, answered brotherlustig, you must go first, and he thought, if the water is too deep Iwill stay behind.  Then St. Peter strode through it, and the waterjust reached to his knee. So brother lustig began to go through also,but the water grew deeper and reached to his throat.  Then he cried,brother, help me.
St. Peter said, then will you confess that you have eaten the lamb'sheart.  No, said he, I have not eaten it.  Then the water grew deeperstill and rose to his mouth.  Help me, brother, cried the soldier.St. Peter said, then will you confess that you have eaten the lamb'sheart.  No, he replied, I have not eaten it.  St. Peter, however,would not let him be drowned, but made the water sink and helped himthrough it.
Then they journeyed onwards, and came to a kingdom where they heardthat the king's daughter lay sick unto death.  Hi, there, brother,said the soldier to St. Peter, this is a chance for us.  If we canheal her we shall be provided for, for life.
But St. Peter was not half quick enough for him.  Come, lift yourlegs, my dear brother, said he, that we may get there in time.  ButSt. Peter walked slower and slower, though brother lustig did all hecould to drive and push him on, and at last they heard that theprincess was dead.  Now we are done for, said brother lustig.  Thatcomes of your sleepy way of walking.
Just be quiet, answered St. Peter, I can do more than cure sickpeople.  I can bring dead ones to life again.  Well, if you can dothat, said brother lustig, it's all right, but you should earn atleast half the kingdom for us by that.  Then they went to the royalpalace, where everyone was in great grief, but St. Peter told theking that he would restore his daughter to life.  He was taken toher, and said, bring me a kettle and some water, and when that wasbrought, he bade everyone go out, and allowed no one to remain withhim but brother lustig.  Then he cut off all the dead girl's limbs,and threw them in the water, lighted a fire beneath the kettle, andboiled them.  And when the flesh had fallen away from the bones, hetook out the beautiful white bones, and laid them on a table, andarranged them together in their natural order.  When he had donethat, he stepped forward and said three times, in the name of theholy trinity, dead woman, arise.  And at the third time, the princessarose, living, healthy and beautiful.
Then the king was in the greatest joy, and said to St. Peter, ask foryour reward.  Even if it were half my kingdom, I would give it.  ButSt. Peter said, I want nothing for it.  Oh, you tomfool, thoughtbrother lustig to himself, and nudged his comrade's side, and said,don't be so stupid. If you have no need of anything, I have.  St.Peter, however, would have nothing, but as the king saw that theother would very much like to have something, he ordered histreasurer to fill brother lustig's knapsack with gold.
Then they went on their way, and when they came to a forest, St.Peter said to brother lustig, now, we will divide the gold.  Yes, hereplied, we will.  So St. Peter divided the gold, and divided it intothree heaps.  Brother lustig thought to himself, what crazy idea hashe got in his head now.  He is making three shares, and there areonly two of us.  But St. Peter said, I have divided it exactly.There is one share for me, one for you and one for him who ate thelamb's heart.
Oh, I ate that, replied brother lustig, and hastily swept up thegold.  You may trust what I say.  But how can that be true, said St.Peter, when a lamb has no heart.  Eh, what, brother, what can you bethinking of.  Lambs have hearts like other animals, why should onlythey have none.  Well, so be it, said St. Peter, keep the gold toyourself, but I will stay with you no longer.  I will go my wayalone.  As you like, dear brother, answered brother lustig.Farewell.
Then St. Peter went a different road, but brother lustig thought, itis a good thing that he has taken himself off, he is certainly astrange saint.  Then he had money enough, but did not know how tomanage it, squandered it, gave it away, and and when some time hadgone by, once more had nothing.  Then he arrived in a certain countrywhere he heard that a king's daughter was dead.
Oh, ho, thought he, that may be a good thing for me.  I will bringher to life again, and see that I am paid as I ought to be.  So hewent to the king, and offered to raise the dead girl to life again.Now the king had heard that a discharged soldier was traveling aboutand bringing dead persons to life again, and thought that brotherlustig was the man.  But as he had no confidence in him, he consultedhis councillors first, who said that he might give it a trial as hisdaughter was dead.
Then brother lustig ordered water to be brought to him in a kettle,bade every one go out, cut the limbs off, threw them in the water andlighted a fire beneath, just as he had seen St. Peter do.  The waterbegan to boil, the flesh fell off, and then he took the bones out andlaid them on the table, but he did not know the order in which to laythem, and placed them all wrong and in confusion.  Then he stoodbefore them and said, in the name of the most holy trinity, deadmaiden, I bid you arise, and he said this thrice, but the bones didnot stir. So he said it thrice more, but also in vain.  Confoundedgirl that you are, get up, cried he, get up, or it shall be the worsefor you.
When he had said that, St. Peter suddenly appeared in his formershape as a discharged soldier.  He entered by the window and said,godless man, what are you doing.  How can the dead maiden arise, whenyou have thrown about her bones in such confusion.  Dear brother, Ihave done everything to the best of my ability, he answered.  Thisonce, I will help you out of your difficulty, but one thing I tellyou, and that is that if ever you undertake anything of the kindagain, it will be the worse for you, and also that you must neitherdemand nor accept the smallest thing from the king for this.
Thereupon St. Peter laid the bones in their right order, said to themaiden three times, in the name of the most holy trinity, deadmaiden, arise, and the king's daughter arose, healthy and beautifulas before.  Then St. Peter went away again by the window, and brotherlustig was rejoiced to find that all had passed off so well, but wasvery much vexed to think that after all he was not to take anythingfor it.  I should just like to know, thought he, what fancy thatfellow has got in his head, for what he gives with one hand he takesaway with the other - there is no sense whatever in it.
Then the king offered brother lustig whatsoever he wished to have,but he did not dare to take anything.  However, by hints and cunning,he contrived to make the king order his knapsack to be filled withgold for him, and with that he departed.  When he got out, St. Peterwas standing by the door, and said, just look what a man you are.Did I not forbid you to take anything, and there you have yourknapsack full of gold.  How can I help that, answered brother lustig,if people will put it in for me.  Well, I tell you this, that if everyou set about anything of this kind again you shall suffer for it.All right, brother, have no fear, now I have money, why should Itrouble myself with washing bones.  Faith, said St. Peter, a longtime that gold will last.  In order that after this you may nevertread in forbidden paths, I will bestow on your knapsack thisproperty, namely, that whatsoever you wish to have inside it, shallbe there.  Farewell, you will now never see me more.  Good-bye, saidbrother lustig, and thought to himself, I am very glad that you havetaken yourself off, you strange fellow.  I shall certainly not followyou.  But of the magical power which had been bestowed on hisknapsack, he thought no more.
Brother lustig traveled about with his money, and squandered andwasted what he had as before.  When at last he had no more than fourkreuzers, he passed by an inn and thought, the money must go, andordered three kreuzers, worth of wine and one kreuzer's worth ofbread for himself.  As he was sitting there drinking, the smell ofroast goose made its way to his nose.
Brother lustig looked about and peeped, and saw that the host had twogeese roasting in the oven.  Then he remembered that his comrade hadsaid that whatsoever he wished to have in his knapsack should bethere, so he said, oh, ho.  I must try that with the geese.  So hewent out, and when he was outside the door, he said, I wish those tworoasted geese out of the oven and in my knapsack, and when he hadsaid that, he unbuckled it and looked in, and there they were insideit.  Ah, that's right, said he, now I am a made man, and went away toa meadow and took out the roast meat.
When he was in the midst of his meal, two journeymen came up andlooked at the second goose, which was not yet touched, with hungryeyes.  Brother lustig thought to himself, one is enough for me, andcalled the two men up and said, take the goose, and eat it to myhealth.  They thanked him, and went with it to the inn, orderedthemselves a half bottle of wine and a loaf, took out the goose whichhad been given them, and began to eat.
The hostess saw them and said to her husband, those two are eating agoose.  Just look and see if it is not one of ours, out of the oven.The landlord ran thither, and behold the oven was empty.  What, criedhe, you thievish crew, you want to eat goose as cheap as that.  Payfor it this moment, or I will wash you well with green hazel-sap.The two said, we are no thieves, a discharged soldier gave us thegoose, outside there in the meadow.  You shall not throw dust in myeyes that way. The soldier was here, but he went out by the door,like an honest fellow.  I looked after him myself.  You are thethieves and shall pay.  But as they could not pay, he took a stick,and cudgeled them out of the house.
Brother lustig went his way and came to a place where there was amagnificent castle, and not far from it a wretched inn. He went tothe inn and asked for a night's lodging, but the landlord turned himaway, and said, there is no more room here, the house is full ofnoble guests.  It surprises me that they should come to you and notgo to that splendid castle, said brother lustig.  Ah, indeed, repliedthe host, but it is no slight matter to sleep there for a night.  Noone who has tried it so far, has ever come out of it alive.
If others have tried it, said brother lustig, I will try it too.Leave it alone, said the host, it will cost you your neck.  It won'tkill me at once, said brother lustig, just give me the key, and somegood food and wine.  So the host gave him the key, and food and wine,and with this brother lustig went into the castle, enjoyed hissupper, and at length, as he was sleepy, he lay down on the ground,for there was no bed.  He soon fell asleep, but during the night wasdisturbed by a great noise, and when he awoke, he saw nine uglydevils in the room, who had made a circle, and were dancing aroundhim.
Brother lustig said, well, dance as long as you like, but none of youmust come too close.  But the devils pressed continually nearer tohim, and almost stepped on his face with their hideous feet.  Stop,you devils, ghosts, said he, but they behaved still worse.  Thenbrother lustig grew angry, and cried, stop.  You'll soon see how Ican make you quiet, and got the leg of a chair and struck out intothe midst of them with it.  But nine devils against one soldier werestill too many, and when he struck those in front of him, the othersseized him behind by the hair, and tore it unmercifully.
Devils, crew, cried he, this is too much, but just wait.  Into myknapsack, all nine of you.  In an instant they were in it, and thenhe buckled it up and threw it into a corner.  After this all wassuddenly quiet, and brother lustig lay down again, and slept till itwas bright day.
Then came the inn-keeper, and the nobleman to whom the castlebelonged, to see how he had fared.  But when they perceived that hewas merry and well they were astonished, and asked, have the spiritsdone you no harm, then.  The reason why they have not, answeredbrother lustig, is because I have got the whole nine of them in myknapsack.
You may once more inhabit your castle quite tranquilly, none of themwill ever haunt it again.  The nobleman thanked him, made him richpresents, and begged him to remain in his service, and he wouldprovide for him as long as he lived.  No, replied brother lustig, Iam used to wandering about, I will travel farther.
Then he went away, and entered into a smithy, laid the knapsack,which contained the nine devils on the anvil, and asked the smith andhis apprentices to strike it. So they smote with their great hammerswith all their strength, and the devils uttered howls which werequite pitiable.  When he opened the knapsack after this, eight ofthem were dead, but one which had been lying in a fold of it, wasstill alive, slipped out, and went back again to hell.
Thereupon brother lustig traveled a long time about the world, andthose who know, can tell many a story about him.  But at last he grewold, and thought of his end, so he went to a hermit who was known tobe a pious man, and said to him, I am tired of wandering about, andwant now to behave in such a manner that I shall enter into thekingdom of heaven.  The hermit replied, there are two roads, one isbroad and pleasant, and leads to hell, the other is narrow and rough,and leads to heaven.  I should be a fool, thought brother lustig, ifI were to take the narrow, rough road.
So he set out and took the broad and pleasant road, and at lengthcame to a great black door, which was the door of hell.  Brotherlustig knocked, and the door-keeper peeped out to see who was there.But when he saw brother lustig, he was terrified, for he was the verysame ninth devil who had been shut up in the knapsack, and hadescaped from it with a black eye.
So he pushed the bolt in again as quickly as he could, ran to thehighest devil, and said, there is a fellow outside with a knapsack,who wants to come in, but as you value your lives don't allow him toenter, or he will wish the whole of hell into his knapsack.  He oncegave me a frightful hammering when I was inside it.
So they called out to brother lustig that he was to go away again,for he should not get in there.  If they won't have me here, thoughthe, I will see if I can find a place for myself in heaven, for I muststay somewhere.
So he turned about and went onwards until he came to the door ofheaven, where he knocked.  St. Peter was sitting hard by asdoor-keeper.  Brother lustig recognized him at once, and thought,here I find an old friend, I shall get on better.  But St. Petersaid, I can hardly believe that you want to come into heaven.  Let mein, brother.  I must get in somewhere.  If they would have taken meinto hell, I should not have come here.  No, said St. Peter, youshall not enter.  Then if you will not let me in, take your knapsackback, for I will have nothing at all from you.  Give it here, then,said St. Peter.  Then brother lustig gave him the knapsack intoheaven through the bars, and St. Peter took it, and hung it besidehis seat.  Then said brother lustig, and now I wish myself inside myknapsack, and in a second he was in it, and in heaven, and St. Peterwas forced to let him stay there.Hans had served his master for seven years, so he said to him,master, my time is up, now I should be glad to go back home to mymother, give me my wages.  The master answered, you have served mefaithfully and honestly, as the service was so shall the reward be.And he gave Hans a piece of gold as big as his head.  Hans pulled hishandkerchief out of his pocket, wrapped up the lump in it, put it onhis shoulder, and set out on the way home.
As he went on, always putting one foot before the other, he saw ahorseman trotting quickly and merrily by on a lively horse.  Ah, saidHans quite loud, what a fine thing it is to ride.  There you sit ason a chair, you stumble over no stones, you save your shoes, andcover the ground, you don't know how.
The rider, who had heard him, stopped and called out, hi, there,Hans, why do you go on foot, then.
I must, answered he, for I have this lump to carry home, it is truethat it is gold, but I cannot hold my head straight for it, and ithurts my shoulder.
I will tell you what, said the rider, we will exchange, I will giveyou my horse, and you can give me your lump. With all my heart, saidHans, but I can tell you, you will have to crawl along with it.
The rider got down, took the gold, and helped Hans up, then gave himthe bridle tight in his hands and said, if you want to go at a reallygood pace, you must click your tongue and call out, jup.  Jup.
Hans was heartily delighted as he sat upon the horse and rode away sobold and free.  After a little while he thought that it ought to gofaster, and he began to click with his tongue and call out, jup.Jup.  The horse put himself into a sharp trot, and before Hans knewwhere he was, he was thrown off and lying in a ditch which separatedthe field from the highway.  The horse would have gone off too if ithad not been stopped by a countryman, who was coming along the roadand driving a cow before him.
Hans pulled himself together and stood up on his legs again, but hewas vexed, and said to the countryman, it is a poor joke, thisriding, especially when one gets hold of a mare like this, that kicksand throws one off, so that one has a chance of breaking one's neck.Never again will I mount it.  Now I like your cow, for one can walkquietly behind her, and have, over and above, one's milk, butter andcheese every day without fail.  What would I not give to have such acow.  Well, said the countryman, if it would give you so muchpleasure, I do not mind giving the cow for the horse.  Hans agreedwith the greatest delight, the countryman jumped upon the horse, androde quickly away.
Hans drove his cow quietly before him, and thought over his luckybargain.  If only I have a morsel of bread - and that can hardly failme - I can eat butter and cheese with it as often as I like, if I amthirsty, I can milk my cow and drink the milk.  My goodness, whatmore can I want.
When he came to an inn he made a halt, and in his great concern ateup what he had with him - his dinner and supper - and all he had, andwith his last few farthings had half a glass of beer. Then he drovehis cow onwards along the road to his mother's village.
As it drew nearer mid-day, the heat was more oppressive, and Hansfound himself upon a moor which it took about an hour to cross.  Hefelt it very hot and his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth withthirst.  I can find a cure for this, thought Hans, I will milk thecow now and refresh myself with the milk. He tied her to a witheredtree, and as he had no pail he put his leather cap underneath, buttry as he would, not a drop of milk came.  And as he set himself towork in a clumsy way, the impatient beast at last gave him such ablow on his head with its hind foot, that he fell on the ground, andfor a long time could not think where he was.
By good fortune a butcher just then came along the road with awheel-barrow, in which lay a young pig.  What sort of a trick isthis, cried he, and helped the good Hans up.  Hans told him what hadhappened.  The butcher gave him his flask and said, take a drink andrefresh yourself.  The cow will certainly give no milk, it is an oldbeast, at the best it is only fit for the plough, or for the butcher.Well, well, said Hans, as he stroked his hair down on his head, whowould have thought it.  Certainly it is a fine thing when one cankill a beast like that at home, what meat one has.  But I do not caremuch for beef, it is not juicy enough for me.  A young pig like thatnow is the thing to have, it tastes quite different, and then thereare the sausages.
Listen, Hans, said the butcher, out of love for you I will exchange,and will let you have the pig for the cow.  Heaven repay you for yourkindness, said Hans as he gave up the cow, whilst the pig was unboundfrom the barrow, and the cord by which it was tied was put in hishand.
Hans went on, and thought to himself how everything was going just ashe wished, if he did meet with any vexation it was immediately setright.  Presently there joined him a lad who was carrying a finewhite goose under his arm.  They said good morning to each other, andHans began to tell of his good luck, and how he had always made suchgood bargains.  The boy told him that he was taking the goose to achristening-feast.  Just lift her, added he, and laid hold of her bythe wings, how heavy she is - she has been fattened up for the lasteight weeks.  Whosoever has a bit of her when she is roasted willhave to wipe the fat from both sides of his mouth.  Yes, said Hans,as he weighed her in one hand, she is a good weight, but my pig is nobad one.
Meanwhile the lad looked suspiciously from one side to the other, andshook his head.  Look here, he said at length, it may not be allright with your pig.  In the village through which I passed, themayor himself had just had one stolen out of its sty.  I fear - Ifear that you have got hold of it there.  They have sent out somepeople and it would be a bad business if they caught you with thepig, at the very least, you would be shut up in the dark hole.
The good Hans was terrified.  Goodness, he said, help me out of thisfix, you know more about this place than I do, take my pig and leaveme your goose.  I shall risk something at that game, answered thelad, but I will not be the cause of your getting into trouble.  So hetook the cord in his hand, and drove away the pig quickly along aby-path.
The good Hans, free from care, went homewards with the goose underhis arm.  When I think over it properly, said he to himself, I haveeven gained by the exchange.  First there is the good roast meat,then the quantity of fat which will drip from it, and which will giveme dripping for my bread for a quarter of a year, and lastly thebeautiful white feathers.  I will have my pillow stuffed with them,and then indeed I shall go to sleep without rocking.  How glad mymother will be.
As he was going through the last village, there stood ascissors-grinder with his barrow, as his wheel whirred he sang,     I sharpen scissors and quickly grind,     my coat blows out in the wind behind.
Hans stood still and looked at him, at last he spoke to him and said,all's well with you, as you are so merry with your grinding. Yes,answered the scissors-grinder, the trade has a golden foundation.  Areal grinder is a man who as often as he puts his hand into hispocket finds gold in it.  But where did you buy that fine goose?
I did not buy it, but exchanged my pig for it.
And the pig?
That I got for a cow.
And the cow?
I took that instead of a horse.
And the horse?
For that I gave a lump of gold as big as my head.
And the gold?
Well, that was my wages for seven years, service.
You have known how to look after yourself each time, said thegrinder.  If you can only get on so far as to hear the money jinglein your pocket whenever you stand up, you will have made yourfortune.
How shall I manage that, said Hans.  You must be a grinder, as I am,nothing particular is wanted for it but a grindstone, the rest findsitself.  I have one here, it is certainly a little worn, but you neednot give me anything for it but your goose, will you do it?
How can you ask, answered Hans.  I shall be the luckiest fellow onearth.  If I have money whenever I put my hand in my pocket, whyshould I ever worry again.  And he handed him the goose and receivedthe grindstone in exchange.  Now, said the grinder, as he took up anordinary heavy stone that lay by him, here is a strong stone for youinto the bargain, you can hammer well upon it, and straighten yourold nails.  Take it with you and keep it carefully. Hans loadedhimself with the stones, and went on with a contented heart, his eyesshining with joy.  I must have been born with a caul, he cried,everything I want happens to me just as if I were a sunday-child.
Meanwhile, as he had been on his legs since daybreak, he began tofeel tired.  Hunger also tormented him, for in his joy at the bargainby which he got the cow he had eaten up all his store of food atonce.  At last he could only go on with great trouble, and was forcedto stop every minute, the stones, too, weighed him down dreadfully.Then he could not help thinking how nice it would be if he had not tocarry them just then.
He crept like a snail to a well in a field, and there he thought thathe would rest and refresh himself with a cool draught of water, butin order that he might not injure the stones in sitting down, he laidthem carefully by his side on the edge of the well. Then he sat downon it, and was to stoop and drink, when he made a slip, pushedagainst the stones, and both of them fell into the water.  When Hanssaw them with his own eyes sinking to the bottom, he jumped for joy,and then knelt down, and with tears in his eyes thanked God forhaving shown him this favor also, and delivered him in so good a way,and without his having any need to reproach himself, from those heavystones which had been the only things that troubled him.
There is no man under the sun so fortunate as I, he cried out. With alight heart and free from every burden he now ran on until he waswith his mother at home.There was once upon a time a young peasant named Hans, whose unclewanted to find him a rich wife.  He therefore seated Hans behind thestove, and had it made very hot.  Then he fetched a pot of milk andplenty of white bread, gave him a bright newly-coined farthing in hishand, and said, Hans, hold that farthing fast, crumble the whitebread into the milk, and stay where you are, and do not stir fromthat spot till I come back.  Yes, said Hans,
I will do all that.  Then the uncle put on a pair of old patchedtrousers, went to a rich peasant's daughter in the next village, andsaid, won't you marry my nephew Hans.  You will get an honest andsensible man who will suit you.  The covetous father asked, how is itwith regard to his means.  Has he bread to break?
Dear friend, replied the uncle, my young nephew has a snug berth, anice bit of money in hand, and plenty of bread to break, besides hehas quite as many patches as I have.  And as he spoke, he slapped thepatches on his trousers, but in that district small pieces of landwere called patches also.  If you will give yourself the trouble togo home with me, you shall see at once that all is as I have said.Then the miser did not want to lose this good opportunity, and said,if that is the case, I have nothing further to say against themarriage.
So the wedding was celebrated on the appointed day, and when theyoung wife went out of doors to see the bridegroom's property, Hanstook off his sunday coat and put on his patched smock and said, Imight spoil my good coat.  Then together they went out and wherever avineyard came in sight, or fields and meadows were divided from eachother, Hans pointed with his finger and then slapped either a largeor a small patch on his smock, and said, that patch is mine, and thattoo, my dearest, just look at it. Meaning thereby that his wifeshould not stare at the broad land, but look at his garment, whichwas his own.
Were you at the wedding too?  Yes, indeed I was there, and in fulldress.  My head-dress was of snow, then the sun came out, and it wasmelted.  My coat was of cobwebs, and I had to pass by some thornswhich tore it off me, my shoes were of glass, and I trod on a stoneand they said, klink, and broke in two.
There was once a poor man and a poor woman who had nothing but alittle cottage, and who earned their bread by fishing, and alwayslived from hand to mouth.  But it came to pass one day when the manwas sitting by the water-side, and casting his net, that he drew outa fish entirely of gold.  As he was looking at the fish, full ofastonishment, it began to speak and said, listen, fisherman, if youwill throw me back again into the water, I will change your littlehut into a splendid castle.
Then the fisherman answered, of what use is a castle to me, if I havenothing to eat.  The gold fish continued, that shall be taken careof, there will be a cupboard in the castle in which, when you openit, shall be dishes of the most delicate meats, and as many of themas you can desire.  If that be true, said the man, then I can well doyou a favor.  Yes, said the fish, there is, however, the conditionthat you shall disclose to no one in the world, whosoever he may be,whence your good luck has come, if you speak but one single word, allwill be over.  Then the man threw the wonderful fish back again intothe water, and went home.
But where his hovel had formerly stood, now stood a great castle. Heopened wide his eyes, entered, and saw his wife dressed in beautifulclothes, sitting in a splendid room, and she was quite delighted, andsaid, husband, how has all this come to pass.  It suits me very well.Yes, said the man, it suits me too, but I am frightfully hungry, justgive me something to eat.  Said the wife, but I have got nothing anddon't know where to find anything in this new house.  There is noneed of your knowing, said the man, for I see yonder a greatcupboard, just unlock it. When she opened it, there stood cakes,meat, fruit, wine, quite a bright prospect.
Then the woman cried joyfully, what more can you want, my dear. Andthey sat down, and ate and drank together.  When they had had enough,the woman said, but husband, whence come all these riches. Alas,answered he, do not question me about it, for I dare not tell youanything.  If I disclose it to anyone, then all our good fortune willdisappear.  Very good, said she, if I am not to know anything, then Ido not want to know anything.  However, she was not in earnest.  Shenever rested day or night, and she goaded her husband until in hisimpatience he revealed that all was owing to a wonderful golden fishwhich he had caught, and to which in return he had given its liberty.And as soon as the secret was out, the splendid castle with thecupboard immediately disappeared, they were once more in the oldfisherman's hut, and the man was obliged to follow his former tradeand fish.
But fortune would so have it, that he once more drew out the goldenfish.  Listen, said the fish, if you will throw me back into thewater again, I will once more give you the castle with the cupboardfull of roast and boiled meats.  Only be firm, for your life's sakedon't reveal from whom you have it, or you will lose it all again.  Iwill take good care, answered the fisherman, and threw the fish backinto the water.  Now at home everything was once more in its formermagnificence, and the wife was overjoyed at their good fortune, butcuriosity left her no peace, so that after a couple of days she beganto ask again how it had come to pass, and how he had managed tosecure it.  The man kept silence for a short time, but at last shemade him so angry that he broke out, and betrayed the secret.
In an instant the castle disappeared, and they were back again intheir old hut.  Now you have got what you want, said he, and we cangnaw at a bare bone again.  Ah, said the woman, I had rather not haveriches if I am not to know from whom they come, for then I have nopeace.
The man went back to fish, and after a while he chanced to draw outthe gold fish for a third time.  Listen, said the fish, I see verywell that I am fated to fall into your hands, take me home and cut meinto six pieces.  Give your wife two of them to eat, two to yourhorse and bury two of them in the ground, then they will bring you ablessing.  The fisherman took the fish home with him, and did as ithad bidden him.  It came to pass, however, that from the two piecesthat were buried in the ground two golden lilies sprang up, that thehorse had two golden foals, and the fisherman's wife bore twochildren who were made entirely of gold.  The children grew up,became tall and handsome, and the lilies and horses grew likewise.Then they said, father, we want to mount our golden steeds and travelout in the world.  But he answered sorrowfully, how shall I bear itif you go away, and I know not how it fares with you.  Then theysaid, the two golden lilies remain here.  By them you can see how itis with us.  If they are fresh, then we are in health.  If they arewithered, we are ill.  If they perish, then we are dead.
So they rode forth and came to an inn, in which were many people, andwhen they perceived the gold-children they began to laugh, and jeer.When one of them heard the mocking he felt ashamed and would not goout into the world, but turned back and went home again to hisfather.  But the other rode forward and reached a great forest. As hewas about to enter it, the people said, it is not safe for you toride through, the wood is full of robbers who would treat you badly.You will fare ill, and when they see that you are all of gold, andyour horse likewise, they will assuredly kill you.
But he would not allow himself to be frightened, and said, I must andwill ride through it.  Then he took bear-skins and covered himselfand his horse with them, so that the gold was no more to be seen, androde fearlessly into the forest.  When he had ridden onward a littlehe heard a rustling in the bushes, and heard voices speakingtogether.  From one side came cries of, there is one, but from theother, let him go, 'tis a bearskin, as poor and bare as achurch-mouse, what should we gain from him.  So the gold-child rodejoyfully through the forest, and no evil befell him.
One day he entered a village wherein he saw a maiden, who was sobeautiful that he did not believe that any more beautiful than sheexisted in the world.  And as such a mighty love took possession ofhim, he went up to her and said, I love you with my whole heart, willyou be my wife.  He, too, pleased the maiden so much that she agreedand said, yes, I will be your wife, and be true to you my whole lifelong.
Then they were married, and just as they were in the greatesthappiness, home came the father of the bride, and when he saw thathis daughter's wedding was being celebrated, he was astonished, andsaid, where is the bridegroom.  They showed him the gold-child, who,however, still wore his bear-skins.  Then the father said wrathfully,a bearskin shall never have my daughter.  And was about to kill him.Then the bride begged as hard as she could, and said, he is myhusband, and I love him with all my heart.  Until at last he allowedhimself to be appeased.  Nevertheless the idea never left histhoughts, so that next morning he rose early, wishing to see whetherhis daughter's husband was a common ragged beggar.  But when hepeeped in, he saw a magnificent golden man in the bed, and thecast-off bear-skins lying on the ground.  Then he went back andthought, what a good thing it was that I restrained my anger.  Iwould have committed a great crime.
But the gold-child dreamed that he rode out to hunt a splendid stag,and when he awoke in the morning, he said to his wife, I must go outhunting.  She was uneasy, and begged him to stay there, and said, youmight easily meet with a great misfortune.  But he answered, I mustand will go.
Thereupon he got up, and rode forth into the forest, and it was notlong before a fine stag crossed his path exactly according to hisdream.  He aimed and was about to shoot it, when the stag ran away.He gave chase over hedges and ditches for the whole day withoutfeeling tired, but in the evening the stag vanished from his sight,and when the gold-child looked round him, he was standing before alittle house, wherein sat a witch.
He knocked and a little old woman came out and asked, what are youdoing so late in the midst of the great forest.  Have you not seen astag. Yes, answered she, I know the stag well.  And thereupon alittle dog which had come out of the house with her, barked at theman violently.  Will you be silent, you odious toad, said he, or Iwill shoot you dead.  Then the witch cried out in a passion, whatwill you slay my little dog.  And immediately transformed him, sothat he lay like a stone, and his bride awaited him in vain andthought, that which I so greatly dreaded, which lay so heavily on myheart, has come upon him.
But at home the other brother was standing by the gold-lilies, whenone of them suddenly drooped. Good heavens, said he, my brother hasmet with some great misfortune I must away to see if I can possiblyrescue him.  Then the father said, stay here, if I lose you also,what shall I do. But he answered, I must and will go forth.
Then he mounted his golden horse, and rode forth and entered thegreat forest, where his brother lay turned to stone.  The old witchcame out of her house and called him, wishing to entrap him also, buthe did not go near her, and said, I will shoot you, if you will notbring my brother to life again.  She touched the stone, though veryunwillingly, with her forefinger, and he was immediately restored tohis human shape.  And the two gold-children rejoiced when they saweach other again, kissed and caressed each other, and rode awaytogether out of the forest the one home to his bride, and the otherto his father.
The father then said, I knew well that you had rescued your brother,for the golden lily suddenly rose up and blossomed out again. Thenthey lived happily, and they prospered until their death.There was once upon a time a man who was about to set out on a longjourney, and on parting he asked his three daughters what he shouldbring back with him for them.  Whereupon the eldest wished forpearls, the second wished for diamonds, but the third said, dearfather, I should like a singing, soaring lark.  The father said, yes,if I can get it, you shall have it, kissed all three, and set out.
Now when the time had come for him to be on his way home again, hehad brought pearls and diamonds for the two eldest, but he had soughteverywhere in vain for a singing, soaring lark for the youngest, andhe was very unhappy about it, for she was his favorite child.  Thenhis road lay through a forest, and in the midst of it was a splendidcastle, and near the castle stood a tree, but quite on the top of thetree, he saw a singing, soaring lark.  Aha, you come just at theright moment, he said, quite delighted, and called to his servant toclimb up and catch the little creature.
But as he approached the tree, a lion leapt from beneath it, shookhimself, and roared till the leaves on the trees trembled.  He whotries to steal my singing, soaring lark, he cried, will I devour.Then the man said, I did not know that the bird belonged to you.  Iwill make amends for the wrong I have done and ransom myself with alarge sum of money, only spare my life.  The lion said, nothing cansave you, unless you will promise to give me for my own what firstmeets you on your return home, and if you will do that, I will grantyou your life, and you shall have the bird for your daughter, intothe bargain.  But the man hesitated and said, that might be myyoungest daughter, she loves me best, and always runs to meet me onmy return home.
The servant, however, was terrified and said, why should yourdaughter be the very one to meet you, it might as easily be a cat, ordog. Then the man allowed himself to be persuaded, took the singing,soaring lark, and promised to give the lion whatsoever should firstmeet him on his return home.
When he reached home and entered his house, the first who met him wasno other than his youngest and dearest daughter, who came running up,kissed and embraced him, and when she saw that he had brought withhim a singing, soaring lark, she was beside herself with joy.  Thefather, however, could not rejoice, but began to weep, and said, mydearest child, I have bought the little bird dear.  In return for it,I have been obliged to promise you to a savage lion, and when he hasyou he will tear you in pieces and devour you, and he told her all,just as it had happened, and begged her not to go there, come whatmight.
But she consoled him and said, dearest father, indeed your promisemust be fulfilled.  I will go thither and soften the lion, so that Imay return to you safely.  Next morning she had the road pointed outto her, took leave, and went fearlessly out into the forest.  Thelion, however, was an enchanted prince and was by day a lion, and allhis people were lions with him, but in the night they resumed theirnatural human shapes.
On her arrival she was kindly received and led into the castle.  Whennight came, the lion turned into a handsome man, and their weddingwas celebrated with great magnificence.  They lived happily together,remained awake at night, and slept in the daytime.  One day he cameand said, to-morrow there is a feast in your father's house, becauseyour eldest sister is to be married, and if you are inclined to gothere, my lions shall conduct you.  She said, yes, I should very muchlike to see my father again, and went thither, accompanied by thelions.
There was great joy when she arrived, for they had all believed thatshe had been torn in pieces by the lion, and had long ceased to live.But she told them what a handsome husband she had, and how well offshe was, remained with them while the wedding-feast lasted, and thenwent back again to the forest.
When the second daughter was about to be married, and she was againinvited to the wedding, she said to the lion, this time I will not bealone, you must come with me.  The lion, however, said that it wastoo dangerous for him, for if when there a ray from a burning candlefell on him, he would be changed into a dove, and for seven yearslong would have to fly about with the doves.  She said, ah, but docome with me, I will take great care of you, and guard you from alllight.  So they went away together, and took with them their littlechild as well.
She had a room built there, so strong and thick that no ray couldpierce through it, in this he was to shut himself up when the candleswere lit for the wedding-feast.  But the door was made of green woodwhich warped and left a little crack which no one noticed.  Thewedding was celebrated with magnificence, but when the processionwith all its candles and torches came back from church, and passed bythis apartment, a ray touched him, he was transformed in an instant,and when she came in and looked for him, she did not see him, but awhite dove was sitting there.  The dove said to her, for seven yearsmust I fly about the world, but at every seventh step that you take Iwill let fall a drop of red blood and a white feather, and these willshow you the way, and if you follow the trace you can release me.Thereupon the dove flew out at the door, and she followed him, and atevery seventh step a red drop of blood and a little white featherfell down and showed her the way.
So she went continually further and further in the wide world, neverlooking about her or resting, and the seven years were almost past,then she rejoiced and thought that they would soon be saved, and yetthey were so far from it.  Once when they were thus moving onwards,no little feather and no drop of red blood fell, and when she raisedher eyes the dove had disappeared.  And as she thought to herself, inthis no man can help you, she climbed up to the sun, and said to him,you shine into every crevice, and over every peak, have you not seena white dove flying.
No, said the sun, I have seen none, but I present you with a casket,open it when you are in sorest need.  Then she thanked the sun, andwent on until evening came and the moon appeared, she then asked her,you shine the whole night through, and on every field and forest,have you not seen a white dove flying.
No, said the moon, I have seen no dove, but here I give you an egg,break it when you are in great need.  She thanked the moon, and wenton until the night wind came up and blew on her, then she said to it,you blow over every tree and under every leaf, have you not seen awhite dove flying.  No, said the night wind, I have seen none, but Iwill ask the three other winds, perhaps they have seen it.
The east wind and the west wind came, and had seen nothing, but thesouth wind said, I have seen the white dove, it has flown to the redsea, where it has become a lion again, for the seven years are over,and the lion is there fighting with a dragon, the dragon, however, isan enchanted princess.  The night wind then said to her, I willadvise you, go to the red sea, on the right bank are some tall reeds,count them, break off the eleventh, and strike the dragon with it,then the lion will be able to subdue it, and both then will regaintheir human form.  After that, look round and you will see thegriffin which is by the red sea, swing yourself, with your beloved,on to his back, and the bird will carry you over the sea to your ownhome.  Here is a nut for you, when you are above the center of thesea, let the nut fall, it will immediately shoot up, and a tallnut-tree will grow out of the water on which the griffin may rest,for if he cannot rest, he will not be strong enough to carry youacross, and if you forget to throw down the nut, he will let you fallinto the sea.
Then she went thither, and found everything as the night wind hadsaid.  She counted the reeds by the sea, and cut off the eleventh,struck the dragon therewith, whereupon the lion conquered it, andimmediately both of them regained their human shapes.  But when theprincess, who hitherto had been the dragon, was released fromenchantment, she took the youth by the arm, seated herself on thegriffin, and carried him off with her.
There stood the poor maiden who had wandered so far and was againforsaken.  She sat down and cried, but at last she took courage andsaid, still I will go as far as the wind blows and as long as thecock crows, until I find him, and she went forth by long, long roads,until at last she came to the castle where both of them were livingtogether, there she heard that soon a feast was to be held, in whichthey would celebrate their wedding, but she said, God still helps me,and opened the casket that the sun had given her.  A dress laytherein as brilliant as the sun itself.  So she took it out and putit on, and went up into the castle, and everyone, even the brideherself, looked at her with astonishment.
The dress pleased the bride so well that she thought it might do forher wedding-dress, and asked if it was for sale.  Not for money orland, answered she, but for flesh and blood.  The bride asked herwhat she meant by that, so she said, let me sleep a night in thechamber where the bridegroom sleeps.  The bride would not, yet wantedvery much to have the dress, at last she consented, but the page wasto give the prince a sleeping-draught.
When it was night, therefore, and the youth was already asleep, shewas led into the chamber, she seated herself on the bed and said, Ihave followed after you for seven years.  I have been to the sun andthe moon, and the four winds, and have enquired for you, and havehelped you against the dragon, will you, then quite forget me.  Butthe prince slept so soundly that it only seemed to him as if the windwere whistling outside in the fir-trees.
When therefore day broke, she was led out again, and had to give upthe golden dress.  And as that even had been of no avail, she wassad, went out into a meadow, sat down there, and wept.  While she wassitting there, she thought of the egg which the moon had given her,she opened it, and there came out a clucking hen with twelve chickensall of gold, and they ran about chirping, and crept again under theold hen's wings, nothing more beautiful was ever seen in the world.Then she arose, and drove them through the meadow before her, untilthe bride looked out of the window.
The little chickens pleased her so much that she immediately camedown and asked if they were for sale.  Not for money or land, but forflesh and blood, let me sleep another night in the chamber where thebridegroom sleeps.  The bride said, yes, intending to cheat her as onthe former evening.  But when the prince went to bed he asked thepage what the murmuring and rustling in the night had been.  On thisthe page told all, that he had been forced to give him asleeping-draught, because a poor girl had slept secretly in thechamber, and that he was to give him another that night.  The princesaid, pour out the draught by the bed-side.
At night, she was again led in, and when she began to relate how illall had fared with her, he immediately recognized his beloved wife byher voice, sprang up and cried, now I really am released.  I havebeen as it were in a dream, for the strange princess has bewitched meso that I have been compelled to forget you, but God has delivered mefrom the spell at the right time.
Then they both left the castle secretly in the night, for they fearedthe father of the princess, who was a sorcerer, and they seatedthemselves on the griffin which bore them across the red sea, andwhen they were in the midst of it, she let fall the nut.  Immediatelya tall nut-tree grew up, whereon the bird rested, and then carriedthem home, where they found their child, who had grown tall andbeautiful, and they lived thenceforth happily until their death.There was once upon a time an old queen whose husband had been deadfor many years, and she had a beautiful daughter.  When the princessgrew up she was betrothed to a prince who lived at a great distance.When the time came for her to be married, and she had to journeyforth into the distant kingdom, the aged queen packed up for her manycostly vessels of silver and gold, and trinkets also of gold andsilver, and cups and jewels, in short, everything which appertainedto a royal dowry, for she loved her child with all her heart.
She likewise sent her maid-in-waiting, who was to ride with her, andhand her over to the bridegroom, and each had a horse for thejourney, but the horse of the king's daughter was called falada, andcould speak.  So when the hour of parting had come, the aged motherwent into her bedroom, took a small knife and cut her finger with ituntil it bled.  Then she held a white handkerchief to it into whichshe let three drops of blood fall, gave it to her daughter and said,dear child, preserve this carefully, it will be of service to you onyour way.
So they took a sorrowful leave of each other, the princess put thepiece of cloth in her bosom, mounted her horse, and then went away toher bridegroom.  After she had ridden for a while she felt a burningthirst, and said to her waiting-maid, dismount, and take my cup whichyou have brought with you for me, and get me some water from thestream, for I should like to drink.  If you are thirsty, said thewaiting-maid, get off your horse yourself, and lie down and drink outof the water, I don't choose to be your servant.
So in her great thirst the princess alighted, bent down over thewater in the stream and drank, and was not allowed to drink out ofthe golden cup.  Then she said, ah, heaven, and the three drops ofblood answered, if this your mother knew, her heart would break intwo.  But the king's daughter was humble, said nothing, and mountedher horse again.
She rode some miles further, but the day was warm, the sun scorchedher, and she was thirsty once more, and when they came to a stream ofwater, she again cried to her waiting-maid, dismount, and give mesome water in my golden cup, for she had long ago forgotten thegirl's ill words.  But the waiting-maid said still more haughtily, ifyou wish to drink, get it yourself, I don't choose to be your maid.Then in her great thirst the king's daughter alighted, bent over theflowing stream, wept and said, ah, heaven, and the drops of bloodagain replied, if this your mother knew, her heart would break intwo.
And as she was thus drinking and leaning right over the stream, thehandkerchief with the three drops of blood fell out of her bosom, andfloated away with the water without her observing it, so great washer trouble.  The waiting-maid, however, had seen it, and sherejoiced to think that she had now power over the bride, for sincethe princess had lost the drops of blood, she had become weak andpowerless.
So now when she wanted to mount her horse again, the one that wascalled falada, the waiting-maid said, falada is more suitable for me,and my nag will do for you, and the princess had to be content withthat.  Then the waiting-maid, with many hard words, bade the princessexchange her royal apparel for her own shabby clothes, and at lengthshe was compelled to swear by the clear sky above her, that she wouldnot say one word of this to anyone at the royal court, and if she hadnot taken this oath she would have been killed on the spot.  Butfalada saw all this, and observed it well.
The waiting-maid now mounted falada, and the true bride the badhorse, and thus they traveled onwards, until at length they enteredthe royal palace.  There were great rejoicings over her arrival, andthe prince sprang forward to meet her, lifted the waiting-maid fromher horse, and thought she was his consort.
She was conducted upstairs, but the real princess was left standingbelow.  Then the old king looked out of the window and saw herstanding in the courtyard, and noticed how dainty and delicate andbeautiful she was, and instantly went to the royal apartment, andasked the bride about the girl she had with her who was standing downbelow in the courtyard, and who she was.  I picked her up on my wayfor a companion, give the girl something to work at, that she may notstand idle.
But the old king had no work for her, and knew of none, so he said, Ihave a little boy who tends the geese, she may help him.  The boy wascalled conrad, and the true bride had to help him to tend the geese.Soon afterwards the false bride said to the young king, dearesthusband, I beg you to do me a favor.  He answered, I will do so mostwillingly.  Then send for the knacker, and have the head of the horseon which I rode here cut off, for it vexed me on the way. In reality,she was afraid that the horse might tell how she had behaved to theking's daughter.
Then she succeeded in making the king promise that it should be done,and the faithful falada was to die, this came to the ears of the realprincess, and she secretly promised to pay the knacker a piece ofgold if he would perform a small service for her.  There was a greatdark-looking gateway in the town, through which morning and eveningshe had to pass with the geese, would he be so goood as to nail upfalada's head on it, so that she might see him again, more than once.The knacker's man promised to do that, and cut off the head, andnailed it fast beneath the dark gateway.
Early in the morning, when she and conrad drove out their flockbeneath this gateway, she said in passing,          alas, falada, hanging there.
Then the head answered,          alas, young queen, how ill you fare.          If this your mother knew,          her heart would break in two.
Then they went still further out of the town, and drove their geeseinto the country.  And when they had come to the meadow, she sat downand unbound her hair which was like pure gold, and conrad saw it anddelighted in its brightness, and wanted to pluck out a few hairs.Then she said,          blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,          blow conrad's little hat away,          and make him chase it here and there,          until I have braided all my hair,          and bound it up again.
And there came such a violent wind that it blew conrad's hat far awayacross country, and he was forced to run after it. When he came backshe had finished combing her hair and was putting it up again, and hecould not get any of it.  Then conrad was angry, and would not speakto her, and thus they watched the geese until the evening, and thenthey went home. Next day when they were driving the geese out throughthe dark gateway, the maiden said,          alas, falada, hanging there.
Falada answered,          alas, young queen, how ill you fare.          If this your mother knew,          her heart would break in two.
And she sat down again in the field and began to comb out her hair,and conrad ran and tried to clutch it, so she said in haste,          blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,          blow conrad's little hat away,          and make him chase it here and there,          until I have braided all my hair,          and bound it up again.
Then the wind blew, and blew his little hat off his head and faraway, and conrad was forced to run after it, and when he came back,her hair had been put up a long time, and he could get none of it,and so they looked after their geese till evening came.
But in the evening after they had got home, conrad went to the oldking, and said, I won't tend the geese with that girl any longer.Why not, inquired the aged king.  Oh, because she vexes me the wholeday long.  Then the aged king commanded him to relate what it wasthat she did to him.  And conrad said, in the morning when we passbeneath the dark gateway with the block, there is a horse's head onthe wall, and she says to it,          alas, falada, hanging there.
And the head replies,          alas, young queen how ill you fare.          If this your mother knew,          her heart would break in two.
And conrad went on to relate what happened on the goose pasture, andhow when there he had to chase his hat.
The aged king commanded him to drive his block out again next day,and as soon as morning came, he placed himself behind the darkgateway, and heard how the maiden spoke to the head of falada, andthen he too went into the country, and hid himself in the thicket inthe meadow.  There he soon saw with his own eyes the goose-girl andthe goose-boy bringing their flock, and how after a while she satdown and unplaited her hair, which shone with radiance.  And soon shesaid,          blow, blow, thou gentle wind, I say,          blow conrad's little hat away,          and make him chase it here and there,          until I have braided all my hair,          and bound it up again.
Then came a blast of wind and carried off conrad's hat, so that hehad to run far away, while the maiden quietly went on combing andplaiting her hair, all of which the king observed.  Then, quiteunseen, he went away, and when the goose-girl came home in theevening, he called her aside, and asked why she did all these things.I may not tell that, and I dare not lament my sorrows to any humanbeing, for I have sworn not to do so by the heaven which is above me,if I had not done that, I should have lost my life.
He urged her and left her no peace, but he could draw nothing fromher.  Then said he, if you will not tell me anything, tell yoursorrows to the iron-stove there, and he went away.  Then she creptinto the iron-stove, and began to weep and lament, and emptied herwhole heart, and said, here am I deserted by the whole world, and yetI am a king's daughter, and a false waiting-maid has by force broughtme to such a pass that I have been compelled to put off my royalapparel, and she has taken my place with my bridegroom, and I have toperform menial service as a goose-girl if this my mother knew, herheart would break in two.
The aged king, however, was standing outside by the pipe of thestove, and was listening to what she said, and heard it. Then he cameback again, and bade her come out of the stove. And royal garmentswere placed on her, and it was marvellous how beautiful she was.  Theaged king summoned his son, and revealed to him that he had got thefalse bride who was only a waiting-maid, but that the true one wasstanding there, as the former goose-girl.  The young king rejoicedwith all his heart when he saw her beauty and youth, and a greatfeast was made ready to which all the people and all good friendswere invited.
At the head of the table sat the bridegroom with the king's daughterat one side of him, and the waiting-maid on the other, but thewaiting-maid was blinded, and did not recognize the princess in herdazzling array.  When they had eaten and drunk, and were merry, theaged king asked the waiting-maid as a riddle, what punishment aperson deserved who had behaved in such and such a way to her master,and at the same time related the whole story, and asked what sentencesuch a person merited.  Then the false bride said, she deserves nobetter fate than to be stripped entirely naked, and put in a barrelwhich is studded inside with pointed nails, and two white horsesshould be harnessed to it, which will drag her along through onestreet after another, till she is dead.
It is you, said the aged king, and you have pronounced your ownsentence, and thus shall it be done unto you.  And when the sentencehad been carried out, the young king married his true bride, and bothof them reigned over their kingdom in peace and happiness.
Once upon a time a countryman had a son who was as big as a thumb,and did not become any bigger, and during several years did not growone hair's breadth.  Once when the father was going out to plough,the little one said, father, I will go out with you. You would go outwith me, said the father.  Stay here, you will be of no use outthere, besides you might get lost.  Then thumbling began to cry, andfor the sake of peace his father put him in his pocket, and took himwith him.
When he was outside in the field, he took him out again, and set himin a freshly cut furrow.  Whilst he sat there, a great giant cameover the hill.  Do you see that great bogie, said the father, for hewanted to frighten the little fellow to make him behave well, he iscoming to fetch you.  The giant, however, had scarcely taken twosteps with his long legs before he was in the furrow.
He took up little thumbling carefully with two fingers, examined him,and without saying one word went away with him. His father stood by,but could not utter a sound for terror, and he thought nothing elsebut that his child was lost, and that as long as he lived he shouldnever set eyes on him again.
But the giant carried him home, let him suckle at his breast, andthumbling grew and became tall and strong after the manner of giants.When two years had passed, the old giant took him into the forest,wanted to test him, and said, pull up a stick for yourself.  Then theboy was already so strong that he tore up a young tree out of theearth by the roots.  But the giant thought, we must do better thanthat, took him back again, and suckled him two years longer.  When hetested him, his strength had increased so much that he could tear anold tree out of the ground.
That was still not enough for the giant, he again suckled him for twoyears, and when he then went with him into the forest and said, nowjust tear up a real stick, the boy tore up the biggest oak-tree fromthe earth, so that it cracked, and that was a mere trifle to him.Now that will do, said the giant, you are perfect.  And took him backto the field from whence he had brought him.  His father was therefollowing the plough.  The young giant went up to him, and said, doesmy father see what a fine man his son has grown into.
The farmer was alarmed, and said, no, you are not my son.  I don'twant you - leave me.  Truly I am your son, allow me to do your work,I can plough as well as you, nay better.  No, no, you are not my son,and you can not plough - go away.  However, as he was afraid of thisgreat man, he let go of the plough, stepped back and sat down at theside of the land.  Then the youth took the plough, and just graspedit with one hand, but his pressure was so strong that the plough wentdeep into the earth.
The farmer could not bear to see that, and called to him, if you aredetermined to plough, you must not press so hard on it, that makesbad work.  The youth, however, unharnessed the horses, and drew theplough himself, saying, just go home, father, and bid my mother makeready a large dish of food, and in the meantime I will go over thefield.  Then the farmer went home, and ordered his wife to preparethe food, but the youth ploughed the field which was two acres large,quite alone, and then he harnessed himself to the harrow, andharrowed the whole of the land, using two harrows at once.  When hehad done it, he went into the forest, and pulled up two oak-trees,laid them across his shoulders, and hung on them one harrow behindand one before, and also one horse behind and one before, and carriedall as if it had been a bundle of straw, to his parents, house.
When he entered the yard, his mother did not recognize him, andasked, who is that horrible tall man.  The father said, that is ourson.  She said, no that cannot be our son, we never had such a tallone, ours was a little thing.  She called to him, go away, we do notwant you.  The youth was silent, but led his horses to the stable,gave them some oats and hay, and all that they wanted.  When he haddone this, he went into the parlor, sat down on the bench and said,mother, now I should like something to eat, will it soon be ready?She said, yes, and brought in two immense dishes full of food, whichwould have been enough to satisfy herself and her husband for a week.The youth, however, ate the whole of it himself, and asked if she hadnothing more to set before him.  No, she replied, that is all wehave.  But that was only a taste, I must have more.
She did not dare to oppose him, and went and put a huge pig's troughfull of food on the fire, and when it was ready, carried it in.  Atlength come a few crumbs, said he, and gobbled all there was, but itwas still not sufficient to appease his hunger.  Then said he,father, I see well that with you I shall never have food enough, ifyou will get me an iron staff which is strong, and which I cannotbreak against my knees, I will go out into the world.  The farmer wasglad, put his two horses in his cart, and fetched from the smith astaff so large and thick, that the two horses could only just bringit away.
The youth laid it across his knees, and snap, he broke it in two inthe middle like a bean-stalk, and threw it away. The father thenharnessed four horses, and brought a bar which was so long and thick,that the four horses could only just drag it.  The son snapped thisalso in twain against his knees, threw it away, and said, father,this can be of no use to me, you must harness more horses, and bringa stronger staff.  So the father harnessed eight horses, and broughtone which was so long and thick, that the eight horses could onlyjust carry it. When the son took it in his hand, he immediatelysnapped off the end of it, and said, father, I see that you will notbe able to procure me any such staff as I want, I will remain nolonger with you.
So he went away, and gave out that he was a smith's apprentice. Hearrived at a village, wherein lived a smith who was a stingy fellow,who never did a kindness to any one, but wanted everything forhimself.  The youth went into the smithy and asked if he needed ajourneyman.  Yes, said the smith, and looked at him, and thought,that is a strong fellow who will strike out well, and earn his bread.So he asked, how much wages do you want.
I don't want any at all, he replied, only every fortnight, when theother journeymen are paid, I will give you two blows, and you mustbear them.  The miser was heartily satisfied, and thought he wouldthus save much money.  Next morning, the strange journeyman was tobegin to work, but when the master brought the glowing bar, and theyouth struck his first blow, the iron flew asunder, and the anvilsank so deep into the earth, that there was no bringing it out again.Then the miser grew angry, and said, oh, but I can't make any use ofyou, you strike far too powerfully.  How much will you have for theone blow.
Then said he, I will give you only quite a small blow, that's all.And he raised his foot, and gave him such a kick that he flew awayover four loads of hay.  Then he sought out the thickest iron bar inthe smithy for himself, took it as a stick in his hand and wentonwards.
When he had walked for some time, he came to a small farm, and askedthe bailiff if he did not require a head-man.  Yes, said the bailiff,I can make use of one.  You look a capable fellow who can dosomething, how much a year do you want as wages.  He again repliedthat he wanted no wages at all, but that every year he would give himthree blows, which he must bear.  Then the bailiff was satisfied, forhe, too, was a covetous fellow.  Next morning all the servants wereto go into the wood, and the others were already up, but the head-manwas still in bed.  Then one of them called to him, get up, it istime, we are going into the wood, and you must go with us.  Ah, saidhe quite roughly and surlily, you may just go, then, I shall be backagain before any of you.  Then the others went to the bailiff, andtold him that the head-man was still lying in bed, and would not gointo the wood with them.  The bailiff said they were to awaken himagain, and tell him to harness the horses.  The head-man, however,said as before, just go there, I shall be back again before any ofyou.  And then he stayed in bed two hours longer.  At length he arosefrom the feathers, but first he got himself two bushels of peas fromthe loft, made himself some broth, ate it at his leisure, and whenthat was done, went and harnessed the horses, and drove into thewood.
Not far from the wood was a ravine through which he had to pass, sohe first drove the horses on, and then stopped them, and went behindthe cart, took trees and brushwood, and made a great barricade, sothat no horse could get through.  When he was entering the wood, theothers were just driving out of it with their loaded carts to gohome.  Then said he to them, drive on, I will still get home beforeyou do.  He did not drive far into the wood, but at once tore two ofthe very largest trees of all out of the earth, threw them on hiscart, and turned round.  When he came to the barricade, the otherswere still standing there, not able to get through.  Don't you see,said he, that if you had stayed with me, you would have got home justas quickly, and would have had another hour's sleep.  He now wantedto drive on, but his horeses could not work their way through, so heunharnessed them, laid them on the top of the cart, took the shaftsin his own hands, and pulled it all through, and he did this just aseasily as if it had been laden with feathers. When he was over, hesaid to the others, there, you see, I have got over quicker than you.And drove on, and the others had to stay where they were.  In theyard, however, he took a tree in his hand, showed it to the bailiff,and said, isn't that a fine cord of wood.
Then said the bailiff to his wife, the servant is a good one - evenif he does sleep long, he is still home before the others.  So heserved the bailiff for a year, and when that was over, and the otherservants were getting their wages, he said it was time for him totake his too.  The bailiff, however, was afraid of the blows which hewas to receive, and earnestly entreated him to excuse him from havingthem, for rather than that, he himself would be head-man, and theyouth should be bailiff.  No said he, I will not be a bailiff, I amhead-man, and will remain so, but I will administer that which weagreed on.  The bailiff was willing to give him whatsoever hedemanded, but it was of no use, the head-man said no to everything.
Then the bailiff did not know what to do, and begged for afortnight's delay, for he wanted to find some way of escape. Thehead-man consented to this delay.  The bailiff summoned all hisclerks together, and they were to think the matter over, and give himadvice.  The clerks pondered for a long time, but at last they saidthat no one was sure of his life with head-man, for he could kill aman as easily as a midge, and that the bailiff ought to make him getinto the well and clean it, and when he was down below, they wouldroll up one of the mill-stones which was lying there, and throw it onhis head, and then he would never return to daylight.
The advice pleased the bailiff, and the head-man was quite willing togo down the well.  When he was standing down below at the bottom,they rolled down the largest mill-stone and thought they had brokenhis skull, but he cried, chase away those hens from the well, theyare scratching in the sand up there, and throwing the grains into myeyes, so that I can't see.  So the bailiff cried, sh-sh, - andpretended to frighten the hens away.  When the head-man had finishedhis work, he climbed up and said, just look what a beautiful neck-tieI have on.  And behold it was the mill-stone which he was wearinground his neck.
The head-man now wanted to take his reward, but the bailiff againbegged for a fortnight's delay.  The clerks met together and advisedhim to send the head-man to the haunted mill to grind corn by night,for from thence as yet no man had ever returned in the morning alive.
The proposal pleased the bailiff, he called the head-man that veryevening, and ordered him to take eight bushels of corn to the mill,and grind it that night, for it was wanted.  So the head-man went tothe loft, and put two bushels in his right pocket, and two in hisleft, and took four in a wallet, half on his back, and half on hisbreast, and thus laden went to the haunted mill.  The miller told himthat he could grind there very well by day, but not by night, for themill was haunted, and that up to the present time whosoever had goneinto it at night had been found in the morning lying dead inside.  Hesaid, I will manage it, just you go and put your head on the pillow.
Then he went into the mill, and poured out the corn.  About eleveno'clock he went into the miller's room, and sat down on the bench.When he had sat there a while, a door suddenly opened, and a largetable came in, and on the table, wine and roasted meats placedthemselves, and much good food besides, but everything came ofitself, for no one was there to carry it.
After this the chairs pushed themselves up, but no people came, untilall at once he beheld fingers, which handled knives and forks, andlaid food on the plates, but with this exception he saw nothing.  Ashe was hungry, and saw the food, he, too, place himself at the table,ate with those who were eating and enjoyed it.  When he had hadenough, and the others also had quite emptied their dishes, hedistinctly heard all the candles being suddenly snuffed out, and asit was now pitch dark, he felt something like a box on the ear.  Thenhe said, if anything of that kind comes again, I shall strike out inreturn.  And when he had received a second box on the ear, he, toostruck out.
And so it continued the whole night.  He took nothing withoutreturning it, but repaid everything with interest, and did not slayabout him in vain.  At daybreak, however, everything ceased.  Whenthe miller had got up, he wanted to look after him, and wondered ifhe were still alive.  Then the youth said, I have given some inreturn.  The miller rejoiced, and said that the mill was now releasedfrom the spell, and wanted to give him much money as a reward.  Buthe said, money, I will not have, I have enough of it.  So he took hismeal on his back, went home, and told the bailiff that he had donewhat he had been told to do, and would now have the reward agreed on.
When the bailiff heard that, he was seriously alarmed and quitebeside himself.  He walked to and fro in the room, and drops of sweatran down from his forehead.  Then he opened the window to get somefresh air, but before he was aware, the head-man had given him such akick that he flew through the window out into the air, and so faraway that no one ever saw him again.
Then said the head-man to the bailiff's wife, if he does not comeback, you must take the other blow.  She cried, no, no I cannot bearit.  And opened the other window, because drops of sweat were runningdown her forehead.  Then he gave her such a kick that she, too, flewout, and as she was lighter she went much higher than her husband.Her husband cried, do come to me, but she replied, come you to me, Icannot come to you.
And they hovered about there in the air, and could not get to eachother, and whether they are still hovering about or not, I do notknow, but the young giant took up his iron bar, and went on his way.There was once upon a time a rich king who had three daughters, whodaily went to walk in the palace garden, and the king was a greatlover of all kinds of fine trees, but there was one for which he hadsuch an affection, that if anyone gathered an apple from it he wishedhim a hundred fathoms underground.  And when harvest time came, theapples on this tree were all as red as blood.  The three daughterswent every day beneath the tree, and looked to see if the wind hadnot blown down an apple, but they never by any chance found one, andthe tree was so loaded with them that it was almost breaking, and thebranches hung down to the ground.
Then the king's youngest child had a great desire for an apple, andsaid to her sisters, our father loves us far too much to wish usunderground, it is my belief that he would only do that to people whowere strangers.  And while she was speaking, the child plucked offquite a large apple, and ran to her sisters, saying, just taste, mydear little sisters, for never in my life have I tasted anything sodelightful.  Then the two other sisters also ate some of the apple,whereupon all three sank deep down into the earth, where they couldhear no cock crow.
When mid-day came, the king wished to call them to come to dinner,but they were nowhere to be found.  He sought them everywhere in thepalace and garden, but could not find them. Then he was muchtroubled, and made known to the whole land that whosoever brought hisdaughters back again should have one of them to wife. Hereupon somany young men went about the country in search, that there was nocounting them, for everyone loved the three children because theywere so kind to all, and so fair of face.
Three young huntsmen also went out, and when they had traveled aboutfor eight days, they arrived at a great castle, in which werebeautiful apartments, and in one room a table was laid on which weredelicate dishes which were still so warm that they were smoking, butin the whole of the castle no human being was either to be seen orheard.  They waited there for half a day, and the food still remainedwarm and smoking, and at length they were so hungry that they satdown and ate, and agreed with each other that they would stay andlive in that castle, and that one of them, who should be chosen bycasting lots, should remain in the house, and the two others seek theking's daughters.
They cast lots, and the lot fell on the eldest, so next day the twoyounger went out to seek, and the eldest had to stay home.  Atmid-day came a small, small mannikin and begged for a piece of bread,then the huntsman took the bread which he had found there, and cut around off the loaf and was about to give it to him, but while he wasgiving it to the mannikin, the latter let it fall, and asked thehuntsman to be so good as to give him that piece again.  The huntsmanwas about to do so and stooped, on which the mannikin took a stick,seized him by the hair, and gave him a good beating.
Next day, the second stayed at home, and he fared no better. When thetwo others returned in the evening, the eldest said, well, how haveyou got on? Oh, very badly, said he, and then they lamented theirmisfortune together, but they said nothing about it to the youngest,for they did not like him at all, and always called him stupid Hans,because he did not know the ways of the world.
On the third day, the youngest stayed at home, and again the littlemannikin came and begged for a piece of bread.  When the youth gaveit to him, the elf let it fall as before, and asked him to be so goodas to give him that piece again.  Then said Hans to the littlemannikin, what, can you not pick up that piece yourself?  If you willnot take as much trouble as that for your daily bread, you do notdeserve to have it.  Then the mannikin grew very angry and said hewas to do it, but the huntsman would not, and took my dear mannikin,and gave him a thorough beating.  Then the mannikin screamedterribly, and cried, stop, stop, and let me go, and I will tell youwhere the king's daughters are. 
When Hans heard that, he left off beating him and the mannikin toldhim that he was a gnome, and that there were more than a thousandlike him, and that if he would go with him he would show him wherethe king's daughters were.  Then he showed him a deep well, but therewas no water in it.  And the elf said that he knew well that thecompanions Hans had with him did not intend to deal honorably withhim, therefore if he wished to deliver the king's children, he mustdo it alone.
The two other brothers would also be very glad to recover the king'sdaughters, but they did not want to have any trouble or danger.  Hanswas therefore to take a large basket, and he must seat himself in itwith his hunting knife and a bell, and be let down.  Below are threerooms, and in each of them was a princess, who was lousing a dragonwith many heads, which he must cut off.  And having said all this,the elf vanished.
When it was evening the two brothers came and asked how he had goton, and he said, pretty well so far, and that he had seen no oneexcept at mid-day when a little mannikin had come and begged for apiece of bread, that he had given some to him, but that the mannikinhad let it fall and had asked him to pick it up again, but as he didnot choose to do that, the elf had begun to scold, and that he hadlost his temper, and had given the elf a beating, at which he hadtold him where the king's daughters were. Then the two were so angryat this that they grew green and yellow.
Next morning they went to the well together, and drew lots who shouldfirst seat himself in the basket, and again the lot fell on theeldest, and he was to seat himself in it, and take the bell with him.Then he said, if I ring, you must draw me up again immediately.  Whenhe had gone down for a short distance, he rang, and they at once drewhim up again.  Then the second seated himself in the basket, but hedid just the same as the first, and then it was the turn of theyoungest, but he let himself be lowered quite to the bottom.
When he had got out of the basket, he took his knife, and went andstood outside the first door and listened, and heard the dragonsnoring quite loudly.  He opened the door slowly, and one of theprincesses was sitting there, and had nine dragon's heads lying uponher lap, and was lousing them.  Then he took his knife and hewed atthem, and the nine fell off.  The princess sprang up, threw her armsround his neck, embraced and kissed him repeatedly, and took herstomacher, which was made of pure gold, and hung it round his neck.
Then he went to the second princess, who had a dragon with five headsto louse, and delivered her also, and to the youngest, who had adragon with four heads, he went likewise.  And they all rejoiced, andembraced him and kissed him without stopping.  Then he rang veryloud, so that those above heard him, and he placed the princesses oneafter the other in the basket, and had them all drawn up, but when itcame to his own turn he remembered the words of the elf, who had toldhim that his comrades did not mean well by him.  So he took a greatstone which was lying there, and placed it in the basket, and when itwas about half way up, his false brothers above cut the rope, so thatthe basket with the stone fell to the ground, and they thought thathe was dead, and ran away with the three princesses, making thempromise to tell their father that it was they who had delivered them.Then they went to the king, and each demanded a princess in marriage.
In the meantime the youngest huntsman was wandering about the threechambers in great trouble, fully expecting to have to end his daysthere, when he saw, hanging on the wall, a flute, then said he, whydo you hang there.  No one can be merry here.
He looked at the dragons, heads likewise and said, you too cannothelp me now.  He walked to and fro for such a long time that he madethe surface of the ground quite smooth.  But at last other thoughtscame to his mind, and he took the flute from the wall, and played afew notes on it, and suddenly a number of elves appeared, and withevery note that he sounded one more came.  Then he played until theroom was entirely filled.
They all asked what he desired, so he said he wished to get aboveground back to daylight, on which they seized him by every hair thatgrew on his head, and thus they flew with him onto the earth again.When he was above ground, he at once went to the king's palace, justas the wedding of one princess was about to be celebrated, and hewent to the room where the king and his three daughters were.  Whenthe princesses saw him they fainted.
Hereupon the king was angry, and ordered him to be put in prison atonce, because he thought he must have done some injury to thechildren.  When the princesses came to themselves, however, theyentreated the king to set him free again.
The king asked why, and they said that they were not allowed to tellthat, but their father said that they were to tell it to the stove.And he went out, listened at the door, and heard everything.  Then hecaused the two brothers to be hanged on the gallows, and to the thirdhe gave his youngest daughter, and on that occasion I wore a pair ofglass shoes, and I struck them against a stone, and they said, klink,and were broken.There was a certain merchant who had two children, a boy and a girl,they were both young, and could not walk.  And two richly-laden shipsof his sailed forth to sea with all his property on board, and justas he was expecting to win much money by them, news came that theyhad gone to the bottom, and now instead of being a rich man he was apoor one, and had nothing left but one field outside the town.  Inorder to drive his misfortune a little out of his thoughts, he wentout to this field, and as he was walking to and fro in it, a littleblack mannikin stood suddenly by his side, and asked why he was sosad, and what he was taking so much to heart.
Then said the merchant, if you could help me I would willingly tellyou.  Who knows, replied the black dwarf.  Perhaps, I can help you.Then the merchant told him that all he possessed had gone to thebottom of the sea, and that he had nothing left but this field.  Donot trouble yourself, said the dwarf.  If you will promise to give methe first thing that rubs itself against your leg when you are athome again, and to bring it here to this place in twelve years, time,you shall have as much money as you will. The merchant thought, whatcan that be but my dog, and did not remember his little boy, so hesaid yes, gave the black man a written and sealed promise, and wenthome.
When he reached home, his little boy was so delighted that he heldhimself by a bench, trotted up to him and seized him fast by thelegs.  The father was shocked, for he remembered his promise, and nowknew what he had pledged himself to do, as however, he still found nomoney in his chest, he thought the dwarf had only been jesting.  Amonth afterwards he went up to the garret, intending to gathertogether some old tin and to sell it, and saw lying there a greatheap of money.  Then he was happy again, made purchases, became agreater merchant than before, and felt that God was good to him.  Inthe meantime the boy grew tall, and at the same time bright andclever.  But the nearer the twelfth year approached the more anxiousgrew the merchant, so that his distress might be seen in his face.One day his son asked what ailed him, but the father would not say.The boy, however, persisted so long, that at last he told him thatwithout being aware of what he was doing, he had promised him to ablack dwarf, and had received much money for doing so.  He saidlikewise that he had set his hand and seal to this, and that now whentwelve years had gone by he would have to give him up.
Then said the son, oh, father, do not be uneasy, all will go well.The black man has no power over me.  The son had himself blessed bythe priest, and when the time came, father and son went together tothe field, and the son made a circle and placed himself inside itwith his father.  Then came the black dwarf and said to the old man,have you brought with you that which you have promised me.  He wassilent, but the son asked, what do you want here?  Then said theblack dwarf, I have to speak with your father, and not with you.  Theson replied, you have betrayed and misled my father, give back thewriting.  No, said the black dwarf, I will not give up my rights.They spoke together for a long time after this, but at last theyagreed that the son, as he did not belong to the enemy of mankind,nor yet to his father, should seat himself in a small boat, whichshould lie on water which was flowing away from them, and that thefather should push it off with his own foot, and then the son shouldremain given up to the water.  So he took leave of his father, placedhimself in a little boat, and the father had to push it off with hisown foot.  The boat capsized so that the keel was uppermost and thedeck under water, and the father believed his son was lost, and wenthome and mourned for him.
The boat, however, did not sink, but floated quietly away, and theboy sat safely inside it, and it floated thus for a long time, untilat last it ran into an unknown shore.  Then he landed and saw abeautiful castle before him, and set out to go to it.  But when heentered it, he found that it was bewitched.  He went through everyroom, but all were empty until he reached the last, where a snake laycoiled in a ring.  The snake, however, was an enchanted maiden, whorejoiced to see him, and said, have you come, oh, my deliverer.  Ihave already waited twelve years for you, this kingdom is bewitched,and you must set it free.  How can I do that, he inquired.  To-nightcome twelve black men, covered with chains who will ask what you aredoing here, but be silent, give them no answer, and let them do whatthey will with you, they will torment you, beat you, stab you, leteverything pass, only do not speak, at twelve o'clock, they must goaway again.  On the second night twelve others will come, on thethird, four-and-twenty, who will cut off your head, but at twelveo'clock their power will be over, and then if you have endured all,and have not spoken the slightest word, I shall be released.  I willcome to you, and will have, in a bottle, some of the water of life.I will rub you with that, and then you will come to life again, andbe as healthy as before.  Then said he, I will gladly set you free.And everything happened just as she had said, the black men could notforce a single word from him, and on the third night the snake becamea beautiful princess, who came with the water of life and brought himback to life again.
So she threw herself into his arms and kissed him, and there was joyand gladness in the whole castle.  After this their marriage wascelebrated, and he was king of the golden mountain.
They lived very happily together, and the queen bore a fine boy.Eight years had already gone by, when the king bethought him of hisfather, his heart was moved, and he wished to visit him. The queen,however, would not let him go away, and said, I know beforehand thatit will cause my unhappiness, but he suffered her to have no restuntil she consented.  At their parting she gave him a wishing-ring,and said, take this ring and put it on your finger, and then you willimmediately be transported whithersoever you would be, only you mustpromise me not to use it in wishing me away from this place and withthy father.  That he promised her, put the ring on his finger, andwished himself at home, just outside the town where his father lived.Instantly he found himself there, and made for the town, but when hecame to the gate, the sentries would not let him in, because he woresuch strange and yet such rich and magnificent clothing.  Then hewent to a hill where a shepherd was watching his sheep, changedclothes with him, put on his old shepherd's-coat, and then enteredthe town without hindrance.
When he came to his father, he made himself known to him, but he didnot at all believe that the shepherd was his son, and said hecertainly had had a son, but that he was dead long ago, however, ashe saw he was a poor, needy shepherd, he would give him something toeat.  Then the shepherd said to his parents, I am verily your son.Do you know of no mark on my body by which you could recognize me.Yes, said his mother, our son had a raspberry mark under his rightarm.  He slipped back his shirt, and they saw the raspberry under hisright arm, and no longer doubted that he was their son.  Then he toldthem that he was king of the golden mountain, and a king's daughterwas his wife, and that they had a fine son of seven years old.
Then said the father, that is certainly not true, it is a fine kindof a king who goes about in a ragged shepherd's-coat.  On this theson fell in a passion, and without thinking of his promise, turnedhis ring round, and wished both his wife and child with him.  Theywere there in a second, but the queen wept, and reproached him, andsaid that he had broken his word, and had brought misfortune uponher.  He said, I have done it thoughtlessly, and not with evilintention, and tried to calm her, and she pretended to believe this,but she had mischief in her mind.
Then he led her out of the town into the field, and showed her thestream where the little boat had been pushed off, and then he said, Iam tired, sit down, I will sleep awhile on your lap. And he laid hishead on her lap, and she picked his lice for a while until he fellasleep.  When he was asleep, she first drew the ring from his finger,then she drew away the foot which was under him, leaving only theslipper behind her, and she took her child in her arms, and wishedherself back in her own kingdom.
When he awoke, there he lay quite deserted, and his wife and childwere gone, and so was the ring from his finger, the slipper only wasstill there as a token.  Home to your parents you cannot return,thought he, they would say that you were a wizard, you must be off,and walk on until you arrive in your own kingdom.  So he went awayand came at length to a hill by which three giants were standing,disputing with each other because they did not know how to dividetheir father's property.
When they saw him passing by, they called to him and said little menhad quick wits, and that he was to divide their inheritance for them.The inheritance, however, consisted of a sword, which, if anyone tookit in his hand, and said, all heads off but mine, every head wouldlie on the ground, secondly, of a cloak which made any one who put iton invisible, thirdly, of a pair of boots which could transport thewearer to any place he wished in a moment.  He said, give me thethree things that I may see if they are still in good condition.
They gave him the cloak, and when he had put it on, he was invisibleand changed into a fly.  Then he resumed his own form and said, thecloak is a good one, now give me the sword.  They said, no, we willnot give you that, if you were to say, all heads off but mine, allour heads would be off, and you alone would be left with yours.Nevertheless they gave it to him on the condition that he was only totry it against a tree.  This he did, and the sword cut in two thetrunk of a tree as if it had been a blade of straw.  Then he wantedto have the boots likewise, but they said, no, we will not give them,if you had them on your feet and were to wish yourself at the top ofthe hill, we should be left down here with nothing.  Oh, no, said he,I will not do that.  So they gave him the boots as well.  And nowwhen he had got all these things, he thought of nothing but his wifeand his child, and said as though to himself, oh, if I were but onthe golden mountain, and at the same moment he vanished from thesight of the giants, and thus their inheritance was divided.
When he was near his palace, he heard sounds of joy, and fiddles, andflutes, and the people told him that his wife was celebrating herwedding with another.  Then he fell into a rage, and said, falsewoman, she betrayed and deserted me whilst I was asleep.  So he puton his cloak, and unseen by all went into the palace.  When heentered the dining-hall a great table was spread with delicious food,and the guests were eating and drinking, and laughing, and jesting.She sat on a royal seat in the midst of them in splendid apparel,with a crown on her head.
He placed himself behind her, and no one saw him.  When she put apiece of meat on a plate for herself, he took it away and ate it, andwhen she poured out a glass of wine for herself, he took it away anddrank it.  She was always helping herself to something, and yet shenever got anything, for plate and glass disappeared immediately.Then dismayed and ashamed, she arose and went to her chamber andwept, but he followed her there.  She said, has the devil power overme, or did my deliverer never come?  Then he struck her in the face,and said, did your deliverer never come.  It is he who has you in hispower, you traitor.  Have I deserved this from you.
Then he made himself visible, went into the hall, and cried, thewedding is at an end, the true king has returned.  The kings,princes, and councillors who were assembled there, ridiculed andmocked him, but he did not trouble to answer them, and said, will yougo away, or not.  On this they tried to seize him and pressed uponhim, but he drew his sword and said, all heads off but mine, and allthe heads rolled on the ground, and he alone was master, and oncemore king of the golden mountain.There was once upon a time a queen who had a little daughter whowas still so young that she had to be carried.  One day thechild was naughty, and the mother might say what she liked, butthe child would not be quiet.  Then she became impatient, and asthe ravens were flying about the palace, she opened thewindow and said, I wish you were a raven and would fly away,and then I should have some rest.  Scarcely had she spoken thewords, before the child was changed into a raven, and flew fromher arms out of the window.  It flew into a dark forest, andstayed in it a long time, and the parents heard nothing of theirchild.
Then one day a man was on his way through this forestand heard the raven crying, and followed the voice, and whenhe came nearer, the bird said, I am a king's daughter by birth,and am bewitched, but you can set me free.  What am I to do, askedhe.  She said, go further into the forest, and you will finda house, wherein sits an aged woman, who will offer you meatand drink, but you must accept nothing, for if you eat anddrink anything, you will fall into a sleep, and then you willnot be able to set me free.  In the garden behind the housethere is a great heap of tan, and on this you shall standand wait for me.  For three days I will come every afternoon attwo o'clock in a carriage.  On the first day four white horseswill be harnessed to it, then four chestnut horses, and lastlyfour black ones, but if you are not awake, but sleeping, I shallnot be set free.  The man promised to do everything that shedesired, but the raven said, alas, I know already that you willnot set me free, you will accept something from the woman.  Thenthe man once more promised that he would certainly not touchanything either to eat or to drink.
But when he entered the house the old woman cameto him and said, poor man, how faint you are, come and refreshyourself, eat and drink.  No, said the man, I will not eat ordrink.  She, however, let him have no peace, and said, ifyou will not eat, take one drink out of the glass, one isnothing.  Then he let himself be persuaded, and drank.  Shortlybefore two o'clock in the afternoon he went into the garden to thetan heap to wait for the raven.  As he was standing there, hisweariness all at once became so great that he could not struggleagainst it, and lay down for a short time, but he was determinednot to go to sleep.  Hardly, however, had he lain down, thanhis eyes closed of their own accord, and he fell asleep andslept so soundly that nothing in the world could have aroused him.
At two o'clock the raven came driving up with four white horses,but she was already in deep grief and said, I know he is asleep.And when she came into the garden, he was indeed lying thereasleep on the heap of tan.  She alighted from the carriage, wentto him, shook him, and called him, but he did not awake.  Nextday about noon, the old woman came again and brought him food anddrink, but he would not take any of it.  But she let him have norest and persuaded him until at length he again took one drinkout of the glass.  Towards two o'clock he went into the garden tothe tan heap to wait for the raven, but all at once felt sucha great weariness that his limbs would no longer support him.He could not help himself, and was forced to lie down, and fellinto a heavy sleep.
When the raven drove up with four brownhorses, she was already full of grief, and said, I know he isasleep.  She went to him, but there he lay sleeping, and there wasno wakening him.  Next day the old woman asked what was the meaningof this.  He was neither eating nor drinking anything, did he wantto die.  He replied, I am not allowed to eat or drink, and willnot do so.  But she set a dish with food, and a glass with winebefore him, and when he smelt it he could not resist, and swalloweda deep draught.  When the time came, he went out into the gardento the heap of tan, and waited for the king's daughter,but he became still more weary than on the day before, and lay downand slept assoundly as if he had been a stone.  At two o'clock the raven camewith four black horses, and the coachman and everything else wasblack.  She was already in the deepest grief, and said, I knowthat he is asleep and cannot set me free.
When she came to him,there he was lying fast asleep.  She shook him and called him,but she could not waken him.  Then she laid a loaf beside him,and after that a piece of meat, and thirdly a bottle of wine, andhe might consume as much of all of them as he liked, but they wouldnever grow less.  After this she took a gold ring from her finger,and put it on his, and her name was graven on it.  Lastly, shelaid a letter beside him wherein was written what she had givenhim, and that none of the things would ever grow less, and in itwas also written, I see right well that here you will never be ableto set me free, but if you are still willing to do so, come tothe golden castle of Stromberg; it lies in your power, of that Iam certain.  And when she had given him all these things,she seated herself in her carriage, and drove to the golden castleof Stromberg.
When the man awoke and saw that he had slept, he was sad at heart,and said, she has certainly driven by, and I have not set her free.Then he perceived the things which were lying beside him,and read the letter wherein was written how everything hadhappened.  So he arose and went away, intending to go to the goldencastle of Stromberg, but he did not know where it was.  After hehad walked about the world for a long time, he entered into a darkforest, and walked for fourteen days, and still could not find hisway out.  Then it was once more evening, and he was so tired thathe lay down in a thicket and fell asleep.  Next day he wentonwards, and in the evening, as he was again about to lie downbeneath some bushes, he heard such a howling and crying that hecould not go to sleep.  And at the time when people light thecandles, he saw one glimmering, and arose and went towards it.
Then he came to a house which seemed very small, for in frontof it a great giant was standing.  He thought to himself, if I goin, and the giant sees me, it will very likely cost me my life.At length he ventured it and went in.  When the giant saw him,he said, it is well that you come, for it is long since I haveeaten, I will at once devour you for my supper.  I'd ratheryou did not, said the man, I do not like to be eaten, but ifyou have any desire to eat, I have quite enough here to satisfyyou.  If that be true, said the giant, you may be easy, I was onlygoing to devour you because I had nothing else.
Then they went,and sat down to the table, and the man took out the bread, wine,and meat which would never come to an end.  This pleases mewell, said the giant, and ate to his heart's content.  Thenthe man said to him, can you tell me where the golden castleof Stromberg is.  The giant said, I will look at my map,all the towns, and villages, and houses are to be found on it.
He brought out the map which he had in the room and looked for thecastle, but it was not to be found on it.  It's no matter, saidhe, I have some still larger maps in my cupboard upstairs,and we will look at them.  But there, too, it was in vain.  Theman now wanted to set out again, but the giant begged him towait a few days longer until his brother, who had gone out tobring some provisions, came home.  When the brother came homethey inquired about the golden castle of Stromberg.  He replied,when I have eaten and have had enough, I will look at the map.
Then he went with them up to his chamber, and they searchedon his map, but could not find it.  Then he brought out stillolder maps, and they never rested until they found the goldencastle of Stromberg, but it was many thousand miles away.  Howam I to get there, asked the man.  The giant said, I have twohours, time, during which I will carry you into the neighborhood,but after that I must be at home to suckle the child that we have.
So the giant carried the man to about a hundred leagues fromthe castle, and said, you can very well walk the rest of the wayalone.  And he turned back, but the man went onwards day andnight, until at length he came to the golden castle of Stromberg.
It stood on a glass-mountain, and the bewitched maiden wasdriving in her carriage round the castle, and then went insideit.  He rejoiced when he saw her and wanted to climb up to her,but when he began to do so he always slipped down the glass again.And when he saw that he could not reach her, he was very worried,and said to himself, I will stay down here below, and wait forher.  So he built himself a hut and stayed in it for a whole year,and every day saw the king's daughter driving about above, butnever could reach her.
Then one day he saw from his hut three robbers who were beatingeach other, and cried to them, God be with you.  They stoppedwhen they heard the cry, but as they saw no one, they once morebegan to beat each other, and that too most dangerously.  So heagain cried, God be with you.  Again they stopped, lookedround about, but as they saw no one they went on beating eachother.  Then he cried for the third time, God be with you, andthought, I must see what these three are about, and went thitherand asked why they were beating each other so furiously.  One ofthem said that he found a stick, and that when he struck a doorwith it, that door would spring open.  The next said that he hadfound a mantle, and that whenever he put it on, he was invisible,but the third said he had found a horse on which a man couldride everywhere even up the glass-mountain.  And now they did not knowwhether they ought to have these things in common, or whetherthey ought to divide them.
Then the man said, I will give yousomething in exchange for these three things.  Money indeedhave I not, but I have other things of more value, but first Imust make an experiment to see if you have told the truth.  Thenthey put him on the horse, threw the mantle round him, and gavehim the stick in his hand, and when he had all these thingsthey were no longer able to see him.  So he gave them somevigorous blows and cried, now, vagabonds, you have got what youdeserve, are you satisfied.  And he rode up the glass-mountain,but when he came in front of the castle at the top, it was shut.
Then he struck the door with his stick, and it sprang openimmediately.  He went in and ascended the stairs until hecame to the hall where the maiden was sitting with a goldengloblet of wine before her.  She, however, could not see himbecause he had the mantle on.  And when he came up to her,he drew from his finger the ring which she had given him, andthrew it into the goblet so that it rang.  Then she cried, thatis my ring, so the man who is to set me free must be here.
They searched the whole castle and did not find him, but he had goneout, and had seated himself on the horse and thrown off themantle.  When they came to the door, they saw him and criedaloud in their delight.  Then he alighted and took the king'sdaughter in his arms, but she kissed him and said, now have youset me free, and to-morrow we will celebrate our wedding.There was once a poor peasant who had no land, but only a smallhouse, and one daughter.  Then said the daughter, we ought to ask ourlord the king for a bit of newly-cleared land.  When the king heardof their poverty, he presented them with a piece of land, which sheand her father dug up, and intended to sow with a little corn andgrain of that kind.  When they had dug nearly the whole of the field,they found in the earth a mortar made of pure gold.  Listen, said thefather to the girl, as our lord the king has been so gracious andpresented us with the field, we ought to give him this mortar inreturn for it.  The daughter, however, would not consent to this, andsaid, father, if we have the mortar without having the pestle aswell, we shall have to get the pestle, so you had much better saynothing about it.  But he would not obey her, and took the mortar andcarried it to the king, said that he had found it in the clearedland, and asked if he would accept it as a present.  The king tookthe mortar, and asked if he had found nothing besides that.  No,answered the countryman.
Then the king said that he must now bring him the pestle.  Thepeasant said they had not found that, but he might just as well havespoken to the wind, he was put in prison, and was to stay there untilhe produced the pestle.  The servants had daily to carry him breadand water, which is what people get in prison, and they heard how theman cried out continually, ah, if I had but listened to my daughter.Alas, alas, if I had but listened to my daughter, and would neithereat nor drink.  So he commanded the servants to bring the prisonerbefore him, and then the king asked the peasant why he was alwayscrying, ah, if I had but listened to my daughter, and what it wasthat his daughter had said.  She told me that I ought not to take themortar to you, for I should have to produce the pestle as well.  Ifyou have a daughter who is as wise as that, let her come here.
She was therefore obliged to appear before the king, who asked her ifshe really was so wise, and said he would set her a riddle, and ifshe could guess that, he would marry her.  She at once said yes, shewould guess it.  Then said the king, come to me not clothed, notnaked, not riding, not walking, not in the road, and not off theroad, and if you can do that I will marry you.
So she went away, put off everything she had on, and then she was notclothed, and took a great fishing net, and seated herself in it andwrapped it entirely round and round her, so that she was not naked,and she hired an ass, and tied the fisherman's net to its tail, sothat it was forced to drag her along, and that was neither riding norwalking.  The ass had also to drag her in the ruts, so that she onlytouched the ground with her big toe, and that was neither being inthe road nor off the road.  And when she arrived in that fashion, theking said she had guessed the riddle and fulfilled all theconditions.
Then he ordered her father to be released from the prison, took herto wife, and gave into her care all the royal possessions. Now whensome years had passed, the king was once reviewing his troops onparade, when it happened that some peasants who had been selling woodstopped with their waggons before the palace, some of them had oxenyoked to them, and some horses. There was one peasant who had threehorses, one of which was delivered of a young foal, and it ran awayand lay down between two oxen which were in front of the waggon.When the peasants came together, they began to dispute, to beat eachother and make a disturbance, and the peasant with the oxen wanted tokeep the foal, and said one of the oxen had given birth to it, andthe other said his horse had had it, and that it was his.  Thequarrel came before the king, and he give the verdict that the foalshould stay where it had been found, and so the peasant with theoxen, to whom it did not belong, got it.
Then the other went away, and wept and lamented over his foal.  Nowhe had heard how gracious his lady the queen was because she herselfhad sprung from poor peasant folks, so he went to her and begged herto see if she could not help him to get his foal back again.  Saidshe, yes, I will tell you what to do, if you will promise me not tobetray me.
Early to-morrow morning, when the king parades the guard, placeyourself there in the middle of the road by which he must pass, takea great fishing-net and pretend to be fishing, go on fishing, andempty out the net as if you had got it full, and then she told himalso what he was to say if he was questioned by the king.  The nextday, therefore, the peasant stood there, and fished on dry ground.When the king passed by, and saw that, he sent his messenger to askwhat the stupid man was about.  He answered, I am fishing.  Themessenger asked how he could fish when there was no water there.  Thepeasant said, it is as easy for me to fish on dry land as it is foran ox to have a foal.
The messenger went back and took the answer to the king, who orderedthe peasant to be brought to him and told him that this was not hisown idea, and he wanted to know whose it was.  The peasant, said theking, must confess this at once.  The peasant, however, would not doso, and said always, God forbid he should, the idea was his own.  Sothey laid him on a heap of straw, and beat him and tormented him solong that at last he admitted that he had got the idea from thequeen.
When the king reached home again, he said to his wife, why have youbehaved so falsely to me.  I will not have you any longer for a wife,your time is up, go back to the place from whence you came - to yourpeasant's hut.  One favor, however, he granted her, she might takewith her the one thing that was dearest and best in her eyes, andthus was she dismissed.
She said, yes, my dear husband, if you command this, I will do it,and she embraced him and kissed him, and said she would take leave ofhim.  Then she ordered a powerful sleeping draught to be brought, todrink farewell to him, the king took a long draught, but she tookonly a little.  He soon fell into a deep sleep, and when sheperceived that, she called a servant and took a fair white linencloth and wrapped the king in it, and the servant was forced to carryhim into a carriage that stood before the door, and she drove withhim to her own little house.
She laid him in her own little bed, and he slept one day and onenight without awakening, and when he awoke he looked round and said,good God, where am I.  He called his attendants, but none of themwere there.  At length his wife came to his bedside and said, my dearlord and king, you told me I might bring away with me from the palacethat which was dearest and most precious in my eyes - I have nothingmore precious and dear than yourself, so I have brought you with me.
Tears rose to the king's eyes and he said, dear wife, you shall bemine and I will be yours, and he took her back with him to the royalpalace and was married again to her, and at the present time they arevery likely still living.About a thousand or more years ago, there were in thiscountry nothing but small kings, and one of them who livedon the Keuterberg was very fond of hunting.  Once on a timewhen he was riding forth from his castle with his huntsmen,three girls were watching their cows upon the mountain, andwhen they saw the king with all his followers, the eldest girlpointed to him, and called to the two other girls, hullo.  Hullo.If I do not get that one, I will have none.  Then the secondgirl answered from the other side of the hill, and pointed tothe one who was on the king's right hand, hullo.  Hullo.  IfI do not get him, I will have no one.  These, however, were thetwo ministers.  The king heard all this, and when he had comeback from the chase, he caused the three girls to be broughtto him, and asked them what they had said yesterday on themountain.  This they would not tell him, so the king askedthe eldest if she really would take him for her husband.  Thenshe said, yes, and the two ministers married the two sisters,for they were all three fair and beautiful of face, especiallythe queen, who had hair like flax.
But the two sisters had no children, and once when the king wasobliged to go from home he invited them to come to the queenin order to cheer her, for she was about to bear a child.  Shehad a little boy who brought a bright red star into the worldwith him.  Then the two sisters said to each other that theywould throw the beautiful boy into the water.  When they hadthrown him in - I believe it was into the Weser - a littlebird flew up into the air, which sang -          to thy death art thou sped          until God's word be said.          In the white lily bloom,          brave boy, is thy tomb.
When the two heard that, they were frightened to death, andran away in great haste.  When the king came home they told himthat the queen had been delivered of a dog.  Then the kingsaid, what God does, is well done.  But a fisherman whodwelt near the water fished the little boy out again whilehe was still alive, and as his wife had no children, they rearedhim.
When a year had gone by, the king again went away, andthe queen had another little boy, whom the false sisterslikewise took and threw into the water.  Then up flew a littlebird again and sang -          to thy death art thou sped          until God's word be said.          In the white lily bloom,          brave boy, is thy tomb.
And when the king came back, they told him that the queenhad once more given birth to a dog, and he again said,what God does, is well done.  The fisherman, however, fishedthis one also out of the water, and reared him.
Then the king again journeyed forth, and the queen had alittle girl, whom also the false sisters threw into thewater.  Then again a little bird flew up on high and sang -          to thy death art thou sped          until God's word be said.          In the white lily bloom,          bonny girl, is thy tomb.
And when the king came home they told him that the queen hadbeen delivered of a cat.  Then the king grew angry, and orderedhis wife to be cast into prison, and therein was she shut upfor many long years.
When the children had grown up, the eldest once went out withsome other boys to fish, but the other boys would not havehim with them, and said, go your way, foundling.
Hereupon he was much troubled, and asked the old fisherman ifthat was true.  The fisherman told him that once when he wasfishing he had drawn him out of the water.  So the boy said hewould go forth and seek his father.  The fisherman, however,entreated him to stay, but he would not let himself be hindered,and at last the fisherman consented.  Then the boy went on hisway and walked for many days, and at last he came to a greatstretch of water by the side of which stood an old woman fishing.
"Good day, mother," said the boy.
"Many thanks," said she.
"You will fish long enough before you catch anything."
"And you will seek long enough before you find your father.  Howwill you get over the water," said the woman.
"God knows."
Then the old woman took him up on her back and carried himthrough it, and he sought for a long time, but could notfind his father.
When a year had gone by, the second boy set out to seek hisbrother.  He came to the water, and all fared with him justas with his brother.  And now there was no one at home but thedaughter, and she mourned for her brothers so much that at lastshe also begged the fisherman to let her set forth, for shewished to go in search of her brothers.  Then she likewise cameto the great stretch of water, and she said to the old woman,"Good day, mother."
"Many thanks," replied the old woman.
"May God help you with your fishing," said the maiden.  Whenthe old woman heard that, she became quite friendly, and carriedher over the water, gave her a wand, and said to her, "Go, mydaughter, ever onwards by this road, and when you come to agreat black dog, you must pass it silently and boldly, withouteither laughing or looking at it.  Then you will come to a greathigh castle, on the threshold of which you must let the wand fall,and go straight through the castle, and out again on the otherside.  There you will see an old fountain out of which a largetree has grown, whereon hangs a bird in a cage which you musttake down.  Take likewise a glass of water out of the fountain,and with these two things go back by the same way.  Pick upthe wand again from the threshold and take it with you, andwhen you again pass by the dog, strike him in the face with it,but be sure that you hit him, and then just come back here to me."
The maiden found everything exactly as the old woman had said, andon her way back she found her two brothers who had sought eachother over half the world.  They went together to the placewhere the black dog was lying on the road, she struck it inthe face, and it turned into a handsome prince who went withthem to the river.  There the old woman was still standing.  Sherejoiced much to see them again, and carried them all over thewater, and then she too went away, for now she was freed.  Theothers, however, went to the old fisherman, and all were glad thatthey had found each other again, but they hung the bird on thewall.
But the second son could not settle at home, and took hiscrossbow and went a-hunting.  When he was tired he took hisflute, and made music.  The king was hunting too, and heard thatand went thither, and when he met the youth, he said, "Who has givenyou leave to hunt here?"
"Oh, no one."
"To whom do you belong, then?"
"I am the fisherman's son."
"But he has no children."
"If you will not believe, come with me."
That the king did, and questioned the fisherman, who toldhim everything, and the little bird on the wall began tosing -          the mother sits alone          there in the prison small,          o king of royal blood,          these are thy children all.          The sisters twain so false,          they wrought the children woe,          there in the waters deep          where the fishermen come and go.
Then they were all terrified, and the king took the bird, thefisherman and the three children back with him to the castle,and ordered the prison to be opened and brought his wifeout again.  She had grown quite ill and weak, so the daughtergave her some of the water of the fountain to drink, and shebecame strong and healthy.  But the two false sisters wereburnt, and the daughter married the prince.There was once a king who had an illness, and no one believed that hewould come out of it with his life.  He had three sons who were muchdistressed about it, and went down into the palace-garden and wept.There they met an old man who inquired as to the cause of theirgrief.  They told him that their father was so ill that he would mostcertainly die, for nothing seemed to cure him.  Then the old mansaid, "I know of one more remedy, and that is the water of life.  Ifhe drinks of it he will become well again, but it is hard to find."The eldest said, "I will manage to find it." And went to the sickking, and begged to be allowed to go forth in search of the water oflife, for that alone could save him.  "No," said the king, "thedanger of it is too great.  I would rather die."
But he begged so long that the king consented.  The prince thought inhis heart, "If I bring the water, then I shall be best beloved of myfather, and shall inherit the kingdom." So he set out, and when hehad ridden forth a little distance, a dwarf stood there in the roadwho called to him and said, "Whither away so fast?" "Silly shrimp,"said the prince, very haughtily, "it is nothing to do with you." Androde on.  But the little dwarf had grown angry, and had wished anevil wish.  Soon after this the prince entered a ravine, and thefurther he rode the closer the mountains drew together, and at lastthe road became so narrow that he could not advance a step further.It was impossible either to turn his horse or to dismount from thesaddle, and he was shut in there as if in prison.  The sick kingwaited long for him, but he came not.
Then the second son said, "father, let me go forth to seek thewater." And thought to himself, "If my brother is dead, then thekingdom will fall to me." At first the king would not allow him to goeither, but at last he yielded, so the prince set out on the sameroad that his brother had taken, and he too met the dwarf, whostopped him to ask whither he was going in such haste.  "Littleshrimp," said the prince, "that is nothing to do with you." And rodeon without giving him another look.  But the dwarf bewitched him, andhe, like the other, rode into a ravine, and could neither go forwardsnor backwards.  So fare haughty people.
As the second son also remained away, the youngest begged to beallowed to go forth to fetch the water, and at last the king wasobliged to let him go.  When he met the dwarf and the latter askedhim whither he was going in such haste, he stopped, gave him anexplanation, and said, "I am seeking the water of life, for my fatheris sick unto death."
"Do you know, then, where that is to be found?"
"No," said the prince.
"As you have borne yourself as is seemly, and not haughtily like yourfalse brothers, I will give you the information and tell you how youmay obtain the water of life.  It springs from a fountain in thecourtyard of an enchanted castle, but you will not be able to makeyour way to it, if I do not give you an iron wand and two smallloaves of bread.  Strike thrice with the wand on the iron door of thecastle and it will spring open, inside lie two lions with gapingjaws, but if you throw a loaf to each of them, they will be quieted.Then hasten to fetch some of the water of life before the clockstrikes twelve else the door will shut again, and you will beimprisoned."
The prince thanked him, took the wand and the bread, and set out onhis way.  When he arrived, everything was as the dwarf had said.  Thedoor sprang open at the third stroke of the wand, and when he hadappeased the lions with the bread, he entered the castle, and came toa large and splendid hall, wherein sat some enchanted princes whoserings he drew off their fingers.  A sword and a loaf of bread werelying there, which he carried away.  After this, he entered achamber, in which was a beautiful maiden who rejoiced when she sawhim, kissed him, and told him that he had set her free, and shouldhave the whole of her kingdom, and that if he would return in a yeartheir wedding should be celebrated.  Likewise she told him where thespring of the water of life was, and that he was to hasten and drawsome of it before the clock struck twelve.  Then he went onwards, andat last entered a room where there was a beautiful newly-made bed,and as he was very weary, he felt inclined to rest a little.  So helay down and fell asleep.
When he awoke, it was striking a quarter to twelve.  He sprang up ina fright, ran to the spring, drew some water in a cup which stoodnear, and hastened away.  But just as he was passing through the irondoor, the clock struck twelve, and the door fell to with suchviolence that it carried away a piece of his heel.
He, however, rejoicing at having obtained the water of life, wenthomewards, and again passed the dwarf.  When the latter saw the swordand the loaf, he said, "With these you have won great wealth, withthe sword you can slay whole armies, and the bread will never come toan end." But the prince would not go home to his father without hisbrothers, and said, "Dear dwarf, can you not tell me where my twobrothers are?  They went out before I did in search of the water oflife, and have not returned."
"They are imprisoned between two mountains," said the dwarf. "I havecondemned them to stay there, because they were so haughty." Then theprince begged until the dwarf released them, but he warned him andsaid, "Beware of them, for they have bad hearts." When his brotherscame, he rejoiced, and told them how things had gone with him, thathe had found the water of life and had brought a cupful away withhim, and had rescued a beautiful princess, who was willing to wait ayear for him, and then their wedding was to be celebrated and hewould obtain a great kingdom.
After that they rode on together, and chanced upon a land where warand famine reigned, and the king already thought he must perish, forthe scarcity was so great.  Then the prince went to him and gave himthe loaf, wherewith he fed and satisfied the whole of his kingdom,and then the prince gave him the sword also wherewith he slew thehosts of his enemies, and could now live in rest and peace.  Theprince then took back his loaf and his sword, and the three brothersrode on.  But after this they entered two more countries where warand famine reigned and each time the prince gave his loaf and hissword to the kings, and had now delivered three kingdoms, and afterthat they went on board a ship and sailed over the sea.  During thepassage, the two eldest conversed apart and said, "The youngest hasfound the water of life and not we, for that our father will give himthe kingdom - the kingdom which belongs to us, and he will rob us ofall our fortune." They then began to seek revenge, and plotted witheach other to destroy him.  They waited until they found him fastasleep, then they poured the water of life out of the cup, and tookit for themselves, but into the cup they poured salt sea-water.
Now therefore, when they arrived home, the youngest took his cup tothe sick king in order that he might drink out of it, and be cured.But scarcely had he drunk a very little of the salt sea-water than hebecame still worse than before.  And as he was lamenting over this,the two eldest brothers came, and accused the youngest of havingintended to poison him, and said that they had brought him the truewater of life, and handed it to him.  He had scarcely tasted it, whenhe felt his sickness departing, and became strong and healthy as inthe days of his youth.
After that they both went to the youngest, mocked him, and said, "Youcertainly found the water of life, but you have had the pain, and wethe gain, you should have been cleverer, and should have kept youreyes open.  We took it from you whilst you were asleep at sea, andwhen a year is over, one of us will go and fetch the beautifulprincess. But beware that you do not disclose aught of this to ourfather, indeed he does not trust you, and if you say a single word,you shall lose your life into the bargain, but if you keep silent,you shall have it as a gift."
The old king was angry with his youngest son, and thought he hadplotted against his life.  So he summoned the court together and hadsentence pronounced upon his son, that he should be secretly shot.And once when the prince was riding forth to the chase, suspecting noevil, the king's huntsman was told to go with him, and when they werequite alone in the forest, the huntsman looked so sorrowful that theprince said to him, "Dear huntsman, what ails you?" The huntsmansaid, "I cannot tell you, and yet I ought." Then the prince said,"Say openly what it is, I will pardon you." "Alas," said thehuntsman, "I am to shoot you dead, the king has ordered me to do it."Then the prince was shocked, and said, "Dear huntsman, let me live,there, I give you my royal garments, give me your common ones intheir stead." The huntsman said, "I will willingly do that, indeed Iwould not have been able to shoot you." Then they exchanged clothes,and the huntsman returned home, while the prince went further intothe forest.
After a time three waggons of gold and precious stones came to theking for his youngest son, which were sent by the three kings who hadslain their enemies with the prince's sword, and maintained theirpeople with his bread, and who wished to show their gratitude for it.The old king then thought, "Can my son have been innocent?" And saidto his people, "Would that he were still alive, how it grieves methat I have suffered him to be killed." "He still lives," said thehuntsman, "I could not find it in my heart to carry out yourcommand." And told the king how it had happened.  Then a stone fellfrom the king's heart, and he had it proclaimed in every country thathis son might return and be taken into favor again.
The princess, however, had a road made up to her palace which wasquite bright and golden, and told her people that whosoever cameriding straight along it to her, would be the right one and was to beadmitted, and whoever rode by the side of it, was not the right oneand was not to be admitted.
As the time was now close at hand, the eldest thought he would hastento go to the king's daughter, and give himself out as her rescuer,and thus win her for his bride, and the kingdom to boot.  Thereforehe rode forth, and when he arrived in front of the palace, and sawthe splendid golden road, he thought, it would be a sin and a shameif I were to ride over that.  And turned aside, and rode on the rightside of it. But when he came to the door, the servants told him thathe was not the right one, and was to go away again.
Soon after this the second prince set out, and when he came to thegolden road, and his horse had put one foot on it, he thought, itwould be a sin and a shame, a piece might be trodden off.  And heturned aside and rode on the left side of it, and when he reached thedoor, the attendants told him he was not the right one, and he was togo away again.
When at last the year had entirely expired, the third son likewisewished to ride out of the forest to his beloved, and with her forgethis sorrows.  So he set out and thought of her so incessantly, andwished to be with her so much, that he never noticed the golden roadat all.  So his horse rode onwards up the middle of it, and when hecame to the door, it was opened and the princess received him withjoy, and said he was her saviour, and lord of the kingdom, and theirwedding was celebrated with great rejoicing.  When it was over shetold him that his father invited him to come to him, and had forgivenhim.
So he rode thither, and told him everything, how his brothers hadbetrayed him, and how he had nevertheless kept silence.  The old kingwished to punish them, but they had put to sea, and never came backas long as they lived.There was once a poor woodcutter who toiled from earlymorning till late at night.  When at last he had laid by somemoney he said to his boy, "You are my only child, I will spend themoney which I have earned with the sweat of my brow on youreducation, if you learn some honest trade you can support me inmy old age, when my limbs have grown stiff and I am obliged tostay at home."
Then the boy went to a high school and learneddiligently so that his masters praised him, and he remainedthere a long time.  When he had worked through two classes, butwas still not yet perfect in everything, the little pittancewhich the father had earned was all spent, and the boy wasobliged to return home to him.
"Ah," said the father, sorrowfully, "I cangive you no more, and in these hard times I cannot earn afarthing more than will suffice for our daily bread."  "Dearfather," answered the son, "don't trouble yourself about it, if itis God's will, it will turn to my advantage.  I shall soonaccustom myself to it."  When the father wanted to go into theforest to earn money by helping to chop and stack wood, theson said, "I will go with you and help you."  "Nay, my son," saidthe father, "that would be hard for you.  You are not accustomedto rough work, and will not be able to bear it.  Besides, I haveonly one axe and no money left wherewith to buy another."  "Justgo to the neighbor," answered the son, "he will lend you his axeuntil I have earned one for myself."
The father then borrowed an axe of the neighbor, and nextmorning at break of day they went out into the forest together.The son helped his father and was quite merry and brisk aboutit.  But when the sun was right over their heads, the fathersaid, "We will rest, and have our dinner, and then we shall worktwice as well."  The son took his bread in his hands, and said,"Just you rest, father, I am not tired, I will walk up and downa little in the forest, and look for birds' nests."  "Oh, you fool,"said the father, "why should you want to run about there?  Afterwardsyou will be tired, and no longer able to raise your arm.Stay here, and sit down beside me."
The son, however, went into the forest, ate his bread, was verymerry and peered in among the green branches to see if he coulddiscover a bird's nest anywhere.  So he walked to and fro untilat last he came to a great dangerous-looking oak, whichcertainly was already many hundred years old, and which fivemen could not have spanned.  He stood still and looked at it, andthought, many a bird must have built its nest in that.  Then all atonce it seemed to him that he heard a voice.  He listened andbecame aware that someone was crying in a very smothered voice,"Let me out, let me out."  He looked around, but could discovernothing.  Then he fancied that the voice came out of the ground.So he cried, "Where are you?"  The voice answered, "I am down hereamongst the roots of the oak-tree.  Let me out.  Let me out."
The schoolboy began to loosen the earth under the tree, and searchamong the roots, until at last he found a glass bottle in a littlehollow.  He lifted it up and held it against the light, and thensaw a creature shaped like a frog, springing up and down in it."Let me out.  Let me out," it cried anew, and the boy thinking noevil, drew the cork out of the bottle.  Immediately a spiritascended from it, and began to grow, and grew so fast that in avery few moments he stood before the boy, a terrible fellow as bigas half the tree.  "Do you know," he cried in an awful voice, "whatyour reward is for having let me out?"  "No," replied the boyfearlessly, "how should I know that?"  "Then I will tell you," criedthe spirit, "I must strangle you for it."  "You should have told methat sooner," said the boy, "for I should then have left you shutup, but my head shall stand fast for all you can do, more personsthan one must be consulted about that."  "More persons here, morepersons there," said the spirit.  "You shall have the reward youhave earned.  Do you think that I was shut up there for such along time as a favor.  No, it was a punishment for me.  I am themighty Mercurius.  Whoso releases me, him must I strangle.""Slowly," answered the boy, "not so fast.  I must first know thatyou really were shut up in that little bottle, and that you arethe right spirit.  If, indeed, you can get in again, I will believeand then you may do as you will with me."  The spirit saidhaughtily, "that is a very trifling feat."  Drew himself together,and made himself as small and slender as he had been at first, sothat he crept through the same opening, and right through the neckof the bottle in again.  Scarcely was he within than the boythrust the cork he had drawn back into the bottle, and threwit among the roots of the oak into its old place, and the spiritwas deceived.
And now the schoolboy was about to return to his father, but thespirit cried very piteously, "Ah, do let me out, ah, do let me out.""No," answered the boy, "not a second time.  He who has once tried totake my life shall not be set free by me, now that I have caughthim again."  "If you will set me free," said the spirit, "I will giveyou so much that you will have plenty all the days of your life.""No," answered the boy, "you would cheat me as you did the first time.""You are spurning you own good luck," said the spirit, "I will do youno harm but will reward you richly."  The boy thought, "I willventure it, perhaps he will keep his word, and anyhow he shall notget the better of me."
Then he took out the cork, and the spiritrose up from the bottle as he had done before, stretched himselfout and became as big as a giant.  "Now you shall have your reward,"said he, and handed the boy a little rag just like stiking-plaster,and said, "If you spread one end of this over a wound itwill heal, and if you rub steel or iron with the other end it willbe changed into silver."  "I must just try that," said the boy, andwent to a tree, tore off the bark with his axe, and rubbed itwith one end of the plaster.  It immediately closed together andwas healed.  "Now, it is all right," he said to the spirit, "and wecan part."  The spirit thanked him for his release, and the boythanked the spirit for his present, and went back to his father.
"Where have you been racing about?" said the father.  "Why have youforgotten your work?  I always said that you would never come toanything."  "Be easy, father, I will make it up."  "Make it up indeed,"said the father angrily, "that's no use."  "Take care, father, I willsoon hew that tree there, so that it will split."  Then he tookhis plaster, rubbed the axe with it, and dealt a mighty blow, butas the iron had changed into silver, the edge bent.  "Hi, father,just look what a bad axe you've given me, it has become quitecrooked."  The father was shocked and said, "Ah, what have you done!Now I shall have to pay for that, and have not the wherewithal, andthat is all the good I have got by yourwork."  "Don't get angry," said the son, "I will soon pay for the axe.""Oh, you blockhead," cried the father, "Wherewith will you pay for it?You have nothing but what I give you.  These are students' tricksthat are sticking in your head, you have no idea of woodcutting."
After a while the boy said, "Father, I can really work no more, wehad better take a holiday."  "Eh, what," answered he, "do you think Iwill sit with my hands lying in my lap like you.  I must go onworking, but you may take yourself off home."  "Father, I am here inthis wood for the first time, I don't know my way alone.  Do gowith me."  As his anger had now abated, the father at last lethimself be persuaded and went home with him. Then he said to theson, "Go and sell your damaged axe, and see what you can get for it,and I must earn the difference, in order to pay the neighbor."
The son took the axe, and carried it into town to a goldsmith,who tested it, laid it in the scales, and said, "It is worth fourhundred talers, I have not so much as that by me."  The son said,"Give me what thou have, I will lend you the rest."  The goldsmithgave him three hundred talers, and remained a hundred in hisdebt.  The son thereupon went home and said, "Father, I have gotthe money, go and ask the neighbor what he wants for the axe.""I know that already," answered the old man, "one taler, six groschen.""Then give him him two talers, twelve groschen, that is double andenough.  See, I have money in plenty."  And he gave the fathera hundred talers, and said, "You shall never know want, live ascomfortably as you like."
"Good heavens," said the father, "howhave you come by these riches?"  The boy then told how all had cometo pass, and how he, trusting in his luck, had made such a packet.But with the money that was left, he went back to the high schooland went on learning more, and as he could heal all wounds withhis plaster, he became the most famous doctor in the whole world.A discharged soldier had nothing to live on, and did not know how tomake his way.  So he went out into the forest and when he had walkedfor a short time, he met a little man who turned out to be the devil.The little man said to him, "What ails you, you seem so verysorrowful?" Then the soldier said, "I am hungry, but have no money."The devil said, "If you will hire yourself to me, and be myserving-man, you shall have enough for all your life.  You shallserve me for seven years, and after that you shall again be free. Butone thing I must tell you, and that is, you must not wash, comb, ortrim yourself, or cut your hair or nails, or wipe the water from youreyes." The soldier said, "All right, if there is no help for it," andwent off with the little man, who straightway led him down into hell.Then he told him what he had to do.  He was to poke the fire underthe kettles wherein the hell-broth was stewing, keep the house clean,drive all the sweepings behind the doors, and see that everything wasin order, but if he once peeped into the kettles, it would go illwith him.  The soldier said, "Good, I will take care." And then theold devil went out again on his wanderings, and the soldier enteredupon his new duties, made the fire, and swept the dirt well behindthe doors, just as he had been bidden.
When the old devil came back again, he looked to see if all had beendone, appeared satisfied, and went forth a second time.  The soldiernow took a good look on every side, the kettles were standing allround hell with a mighty fire below them, and inside they wereboiling and sputtering.  He would have given anything to look insidethem, if the devil had not so particularly forbidden him.
At last he could no longer restrain himself, slightly raised the lidof the first kettle, and peeped in, and there he saw his formercorporal sitting. "Aha, old bird," said he, "do I meet you here?  Youonce had me in your power, now I have you." And he quickly let thelid fall, poked the fire, and added a fresh log.  After that, he wentto the second kettle, raised its lid also a little, and peeped in andthere sat his former ensign.  "Aha, old bird, so I find you here, youonce had me in your power, now I have you." He closed the lid again,and fetched yet another log to make it really hot.  Then he wanted tosee who might be sitting up in the third kettle - and who should itbe but his general.  "Aha, old bird, do I meet you here.  Once youhad me in your power, now I have you." And he fetched the bellows andmade hell-fire blaze right under him.
So he did his work seven years in hell, did not wash, comb, or trimhimself, or cut his hair or nails, or wash the water out of his eyes,and the seven years seemed so short to him that he thought he hadonly been half a year.  Now when the time had fully gone by, thedevil came and said, "Well Hans, what have you done?" "I poked thefire under the kettles, and I have swept all the dirt well behind thedoors."
"But you have peeped into the kettles as well, it is lucky for youthat you added fresh logs to them, or else your life would have beenforfeited.  Now that your time is up, will you go home again?" "Yes,"said the soldier, "I should very much like to see what my father isdoing at home." The devil said, "In order that you may receive thewages you have earned, go and fill your knapsack full of thesweepings, and take it home with you.  You must also go unwashed anduncombed, with long hair on your head and beard, and with uncut nailsand dim eyes, and when you are asked whence you come, you must say,from hell, and when you are asked who you are, you are to say, thedevil's sooty brother, and my king as well."
The soldier held his peace, and did as the devil bade him, but he wasnot at all satisfied with his wages. Then as soon as he was up in theforest again, he took his knapsack from his back, to empty it, but onopening it, the sweepings had become pure gold.  "I should never haveexpected that," said he, and was well pleased, and entered the town.The landlord was standing in front of the inn, and when he saw thesoldier approaching, he was terrified, because Hans looked such ahorrible sight, worse than a scare-crow.  He called to him and asked,"Whence do you come?" "From hell." "Who are you?" "The devil's sootybrother, and my king as well." Then the host would not let him enter,but when Hans showed him the gold, he came and unlatched the doorhimself.  Hans then ordered the best room and attendance, ate, anddrank his fill, but neither washed nor combed himself as the devilhad bidden him, and at last lay down to sleep.  But the knapsack fullof gold remained before the eyes of the landlord, and left him nopeace, and during the night he crept in and stole it away.  Nextmorning, however, when Hans got up and wanted to pay the landlord andtravel further, behold his knapsack was gone.  But he soon composedhimself and thought, you have been unfortunate from no fault of yourown.  And straightway went back again to hell, complained of hismisfortune to the old devil, and begged for his help.  The devilsaid, "Seat yourself, I will wash, comb, and trim you, cut your hairand nails, and wash your eyes for you." And when he had done withhim, he gave him the knapsack back again full of sweepings, and said,"Go and tell the landlord that he must return you your money, or elseI will come and fetch him, and he shall poke the fire in your place."Hans went up and said to the landlord, "You have stolen my money, ifyou do not return it, you shall go down to hell in my place, and willlook as horrible as I." Then the landlord gave him the money, andmore besides, only begging him to keep it secret.  And Hans was now arich man.
He set out on his way home to his father, bought himself a shabbysmock to wear, and strolled about making music, for he had learned todo that while he was with the devil in hell.
There was however, an old king in that country, before whom he had toplay, and the king was so delighted with his playing, that hepromised him his eldest daughter in marriage.  But when she heardthat she was to be married to a common fellow in a smock, she said,"Rather than do that, I would go into the deepest water." Then theking gave him the youngest, who was quite willing to do it to pleaseher father, and thus the devil's sooty brother got the king'sdaughter, and when the aged king died, the whole kingdom likewise.
There was once a young fellow who enlisted as a soldier, conductedhimself bravely, and was always the foremost when it rained bullets.So long as the war lasted, all went well, but when peace was made, hereceived his dismissal, and the captain said he might go where heliked.  His parents were dead, and he had no longer a home, so hewent to his brothers and begged them to take him in, and keep himuntil war broke out again.  The brothers, however, were hard-heartedand said, "What can we do with you?  You are of no use to us, go andmake a living for yourself." The soldier had nothing left but hisgun, so he took that on his shoulder, and went forth into the world.
He came to a wide heath, on which nothing was to be seen but a circleof trees, under these he sat sorrowfully down, and began to thinkover his fate.  I have no money, thought he, I have learnt no tradebut that of fighting, and now that they have made peace they don'twant me any longer, so I see before hand that I shall have to starve.All at once he heard a rustling and when he looked round, a strangeman stood before him, who wore a green coat and looked right stately,but had a hideous cloven foot.  "I know already what you are in needof," said the man, "gold and possessions shall you have, as much asyou can make away with, do what you will, but first I must know ifyou are fearless, that I may not bestow my money in vain." "A soldierand fear - how can those two things go together?" he answered, "Youcan put me to the proof." "Very well, then," answered the man, "lookbehind you." The soldier turned round, and saw a large bear, whichcame growling towards him.  "Oho," cried the soldier, "I will tickleyour nose for you, so that you shall soon lose your fancy forgrowling," and he aimed at the bear and shot it through the muzzle,it fell down and never stirred again.  "I see quite well," said thestranger, "that you are not wanting in courage, but there is stillanother condition which you will have to fulfil." "If it does notendanger my salvation," replied the soldier, who knew very well whowas standing by him.  "If it does, I'll have nothing to do with it.""You will look to that for yourself," answered greencoat, "you shallfor the next seven years neither wash yourself, nor comb your beard,nor your hair, nor cut your nails, nor once say the Lord's prayer.  Iwill give you a coat and a cloak, which during this time you mustwear.  If you die during these seven years, you are mine, if youremain alive, you are free, and rich to boot, for all the rest ofyour life." The soldier thought of the great extremity in which henow found himself, and as he so often had gone to meet death, heresolved to risk it now also, and agreed to the terms.  The deviltook off his green coat, and gave it to the soldier, and said, "Ifyou have this coat on your back and put your hand into the pocket,you will always find it full of money." Then he pulled the skin offthe bear and said, "This shall be your cloak, and your bed also, forthereon shall you sleep, and and in no other bed shall you lie, andbecause of this apparel shall you be called Bearskin." Whereupon thedevil vanished.
The soldier put the coat on, felt at once in the pocket, and foundthat the thing was really true.  Then he put on the bearskin and wentforth into the world, and enjoyed himself, refraining from nothingthat did him good and his money harm.
During the first year his appearance was passable, but during thesecond he began to look like a monster.  His hair covered nearly thewhole of his face, his beard was like a piece of coarse felt, hisfingers had claws, and his face was so covered with dirt that ifcress had been sown on it, it would have come up.  Whosoever saw him,ran away, but as he everywhere gave the poor money to pray that hemight not die during the seven years, and as he paid well foreverything he still always found shelter.
In the fourth year, he entered an inn where the landlord would notreceive him, and would not even let him have a place in the stable,because he was afraid the horses would be scared.  But as Bearskinthrust his hand into his pocket and pulled out a handful of ducats,the host let himself be persuaded and gave him a room in an outhouse.Bearskin, however, was obliged to promise not to let himself be seen,lest the inn should get a bad name.
As Bearskin was sitting alone in the evening, and wishing from thebottom of his heart that the seven years were over, he heard a loudlamenting in a neighboring room.  He had a compassionate heart, so heopened the door, and saw an old man weeping bitterly, and wringinghis hands.  Bearskin went nearer, but the man sprang to his feet andtried to escape from him. At last when the man perceived thatBearskin's voice was human he let himself be prevailed upon, and bykind words bearskin succeeded so far that the old man revealed thecause of his grief. His property had dwindled away by degrees, he andhis daughters would have to starve, and he was so poor that he couldnot pay the innkeeper, and was to be put in prison.  "If that is youronly trouble," said Bearskin, "I have plenty of money." He caused theinnkeeper to be brought thither, paid him and even put a purse fullof gold into the poor old man's pocket.
When the old man saw himself set free from all his troubles he didnot know how to show his gratitude.  "Come with me," said he toBearskin, "my daughters are all miracles of beauty, choose one ofthem for yourself as a wife.  When she hears what you have done forme, she will not refuse you.  You do in truth look a little strange,but she will soon put you to rights again." This pleased Bearskinwell, and he went.  When the eldest saw him she was so terriblyalarmed at his face that she screamed and ran away.  The second stoodstill and looked at him from head to foot, but then she said, "Howcan I accept a husband who no longer has a human form?  The shavenbear that once was here and passed itself off for a man pleased mefar better, for at any rate it wore a hussar's dress and whitegloves.  If he were only ugly, I might get used to that." Theyoungest, however, said, "Dear father, that must be a good man tohave helped you out of your trouble, so if you have promised him abride for doing it, your promise must be kept." It was a pity thatBearskin's face was covered with dirt and with hair, for if not theymight have seen how delighted he was when he heard these words.  Hetook a ring from his finger, broke it in two, and gave her one half,the other he kept for himself.  Then he wrote his name on her half,and hers on his, and begged her to keep her piece carefully. Then hetook his leave and said, "I must still wander about for three years,and if I do not return then, you are free, for I shall be dead.  Butpray to God to preserve my life."
The poor betrothed bride dressed herself entirely in black, and whenshe thought of her future bridegroom, tears came into her eyes.Nothing but contempt and mockery fell to her lot from her sisters."Take care," said the eldest, "if you give him your hand, he willstrike his claws into it." "Beware," said the second.  "Bears likesweet things, and if he takes a fancy to you, he will eat you up.""You must always do as he likes," began the elder again, or else hewill growl." And the second continued, "But the wedding will be amerry one, for bears dance well." The bride was silent, and did notlet them vex her.  Bearskin, however, traveled about the world fromone place to another, did good where he was able, and gave generouslyto the poor that they might pray for him.
At length, as the last day of the seven years dawned, he went oncemore out on to the heath, and seated himself beneath the circle oftrees.  It was not long before the wind whistled, and the devil stoodbefore him and looked angrily at him, then he threw bearskin hiscoat, and asked for his own green one back. "We have not got so faras that yet," answered Bearskin, "you must first make me clean."Whether the devil liked it or not, he was forced to fetch water, andwash Bearskin, comb his hair, and cut his nails.  After this, helooked like a brave soldier, and was much handsomer than he had everbeen before.
When the devil had gone away, Bearskin was quite lighthearted. Hewent into the town, put on a magnificent velvet coat, seated himselfin a carriage drawn by four white horses, and drove to his bride'shouse.  No one recognized him.  The father took him for adistinguished general, and led him into the room where his daughterswere sitting.  He was forced to place himself between the two eldest,who helped him to wine, gave him the best pieces of meat, and thoughtthat in all the world they had never seen a handsomer man.  Thebride, however, sat opposite to him in her black dress, and neverraised her eyes, nor spoke a word.  When at length he asked thefather if he would give him one of his daughters to wife, the twoeldest jumped up, ran into their bedrooms to put on splendid dresses,for each of them fancied she was the chosen one.
The stranger, as soon as he was alone with his bride, brought out hishalf of the ring, and threw it in a glass of wine which he handedacross the table to her.  She took the wine, but when she had drunkit, and found the half ring lying at the bottom, her heart began tobeat.  She got the other half, which she wore on a ribbon round herneck, joined them, and saw that the two pieces fitted exactlytogether.  Then said he, "I am your betrothed bridegroom, whom yousaw as Bearskin, but through God's grace I have again received myhuman form, and have once more become clean." He went up to her,embraced her, and gave her a kiss.  In the meantime the two sisterscame back in full dress, and when they saw that the handsome man hadfallen to the share of the youngest, and heard that he was Bearskin,they ran out full of anger and rage.  One of them drowned herself inthe well, the other hanged herself on a tree.  In the evening, someone knocked at the door, and when the bridegroom opened it, it wasthe devil in his green coat, who said, "You see, I have now got twosouls in the place of your one."Once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest,and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said,"Brother wolf, what bird is it that sings so well?" "That is the kingof birds," said the wolf, "before whom we must bow down." In realitythe bird was the willow-wren.  "If that's the case," said the bear,"I should very much like to see his royal palace, come, take methither." "That is not done quite as you seem to think," said thewolf, "you must wait until the queen comes." Soon afterwards thequeen arrived with some food in her beak, and the lord king came too,and they began to feed their young ones.  The bear would have likedto go at once, but the wolf held him back by the sleeve, and said,no, you must wait until the lord and lady queen have gone away again.So they took stock of the hole where the nest lay, and trotted away.
The bear, however, could not rest until he had seen the royal palace,and when a short time had passed, went to it again.  The king andqueen had just flown out, so he peeped in and saw five or six youngones lying there.  "Is that the royal palace," cried the bear, "it isa wretched palace, and you are not king's children, you aredisreputable children." When the young wrens heard that, they werefrightfully angry, and screamed, "No, that we are not.  Our parentsare honest people. Bear, you will have to pay for that."
The bear and the wolf grew uneasy, and turned back and went intotheir holes.  The young willow-wrens, however, continued to cry andscream, and when their parents again brought food they said, "We willnot so much as touch one fly's leg, no, not if we were dying ofhunger, until you have settled whether we are respectable children ornot, the bear has been here and has insulted us." Then the old kingsaid, "Be easy, he shall be punished," and he at once flew with thequeen to the bear's cave, and called in, "Old growler, why have youinsulted my children? You shall suffer for it - we will punish you bya bloody war."
Thus war was announced to the bear, and all four-footed animals weresummoned to take part in it, oxen, asses, cows, deer, and every otheranimal the earth contained.  And the willow-wren summoned everythingwhich flew in the air, not only birds, large and small, but midges,and hornets, bees and flies had to come. When the time came for thewar to begin, the willow-wren sent out spies to discover who was theenemy's commander-in-chief.
The gnat, who was the most crafty, flew into the forest where theenemy was assembled, and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree wherethe password was to be announced.  There stood the bear, and hecalled the fox before him and said, "Fox, you are the most cunning ofall animals, you shall be general and lead us." "Good," said the fox,"but what signal shall we agree upon?" No one knew that, so the foxsaid, "I have a fine long bushy tail, which almost looks like a plumeof red feathers. When I lift my tail up quite high, all is goingwell, and you must charge, but if I let it hang down, run away asfast as you can." When the gnat had heard that, she flew away again,and revealed everything, down to the minutest detail, to thewillow-wren.
When day broke, and the battle was to begin, all the four-footedanimals came running up with such a noise that the earth trembled.The willow-wren with his army also came flying through the air withsuch a humming, and whirring, and swarming that every one was uneasyand afraid, and on both sides they advanced against each other.  Butthe willow-wren sent down the hornet, with orders to settle beneaththe fox's tail, and sting with all his might.  When the fox felt thefirst sting, he started so that he lifted one leg, from pain, but hebore it, and still kept his tail high in the air, at the secondsting, he was forced to put it down for a moment, at the third, hecould hold out no longer, screamed, and put his tail between hislegs. When the animals saw that, they thought all was lost, and beganto flee, each into his hole, and the birds had won the battle.
Then the king and queen flew home to their children and cried,"Children, rejoice, eat and drink to your heart's content, we havewon the battle.  But the young wrens said, we will not eat yet, thebear must come to the nest, and beg for pardon and say that we arehonorable children, before we will do that." Then the willow-wrenflew to the bear's hole and cried, "Growler, you are to come to thenest to my children, and beg their pardon, or else every rib of yourbody shall be broken." So the bear crept thither in the greatestfear, and begged their pardon.  And now at last the young wrens weresatisfied, and sat down together and ate and drank, and made merrytill quite late into the night.There was a poor but good little girl who lived alone with hermother, and they no longer had anything to eat.  So the child wentinto the forest, and there an aged woman met her who was aware of hersorrow, and presented her with a little pot, which when she said,cook, little pot, cook, would cook good, sweet porridge, and when shesaid, stop, little pot, it ceased to cook.  The girl took the pothome to her mother, and now they were freed from their poverty andhunger, and ate sweet porridge as often as they chose.  Once on atime when the girl had gone out, her mother said, cook, little pot,cook.  And it did cook and she ate till she was satisfied, and thenshe wanted the pot to stop cooking, but did not know the word.  So itwent on cooking and the porridge rose over the edge, and still itcooked on until the kitchen and whole house were full, and then thenext house, and then the whole street, just as if it wanted tosatisfy the hunger of the whole world, and there was the greatestdistress, but no one knew how to stop it.  At last when only onesingle house remained, the child came home and just said, stop,little pot, and it stopped and gave up cooking, and whosoever wishedto return to the town had to eat his way back.One day a peasant took his good hazel-stick out of the cornerand said to his wife, trina, I am going across country, andshall not return for three days.  If during that time thecattle-dealer should happen to call and want to buy our threecows, you may strike a bargain at once, but not unless you canget two hundred talers for them, nothing less, do you hear.  Forheaven's sake, just go in peace, answered the woman, I willmanage that.  You, indeed, said the man.  You once fell on yourhead when you were a little child, and that affects you even now,but let me tell you this, if you do anything foolish, I willmake your back black and blue, and not with paint, I assureyou, but with the stick which I have in my hand, and the coloringshall last a whole year, you may rely on that.  And having saidthat, the man went on his way.
Next morning the cattle-dealer came, and the woman had noneed to say many words to him.  When he had seen the cows and heardthe price, he said, I am quite willing to give that.  Honestlyspeaking, they are worth it.  I will take the beasts away withme at once.  He unfastened their chains and drove them out ofthe byre, but just as he was going out of the yard-door, thewoman clutched him by the sleeve and said, you must give me thetwo hundred talers now, or I cannot let the cows go.  True, answered the man,but I have forgotten to buckle on my money-belt.  Have no fear,however, you shall have security for my paying.  I will take twocows with me and leave one, and then you will have a good pledge.
The woman saw the force of this, and let the man go awaywith the cows, and thought to herself, how pleased Hans will bewhen he finds how cleverly I have managed it.  The peasant camehome on the third day as he had said he would, and at once inquiredif the cows were sold.  Yes, indeed, dear Hans, answered thewoman, and as you said, for two hundred talers.  They are scarcelyworth so much, but the man took them without making any objection.Where is the money, asked the peasant.  Oh, I have not got themoney, replied the woman, he had happened to forget his money-belt,but he will soon bring it, and he left good security behind him.What kind of security, asked the man.  One of the three cows, whichhe shall not have until he has paid for the other two.  I havemanaged very cunningly, for I have kept the smallest, which eatsthe least.  The man was enraged and lifted up his stick, and wasjust going to give her the beating he had promised her, whensuddenly he let the stick fail and said, youare the stupidest goose that ever waddled on God's earth, butI am sorry for you.  I will go out into the highways and wait forthree days to see if I find anyone who is still stupider than you.If I succeed in doing so, you shall go scot-free, but if I do notfind him, you shall receive your well-deserved reward without anydiscount.
He went out into the great highways, sat down on a stone, andwaited for what would happen.  Then he saw a peasant's waggoncoming towards him, and a woman was standing upright in themiddle of it, instead of sitting on the bundle of straw whichwas lying beside her, or walking near the oxen and leading them.
The man thought to himself, that is certainly one of the kind Iam in search of, and jumped up and ran backwards and forwards infront of the waggon like one who is not in his right mind.  Whatdo you want, my friend, said the woman to him.  I don't know you,where do you come from.  I have fallen down from heaven, repliedthe man, and don't know how to get back again, couldn't you driveme up.  No, said the woman, I don't know the way, but if you comefrom heaven you can surely tell me how my husband is, who has beenthere these three years.  You must have seen him.  Oh, yes, Ihave seen him, but all men can't get on well.  He keeps sheep,and the sheep give him a great deal to do.  They run up themountains and lose their way in the wilderness, and he has to runafter them and drive them together again.  His clothes areall torn to pieces too, and will soon fall off his body.  There isno tailor there, for saint peter won't let any of them in, as youknow by the story.  Who would have thought it, cried the woman, Itell you what, I will fetch his sunday coat which is still hangingat home in the cupboard.  He can wear that and look respectable.You will be so kind as to take it with you.  That won't do verywell, answered the peasant, people are not allowed to take clothesinto heaven, they are taken away at the gate.  Then listen, saidthe woman, I sold my fine wheat yesterday and got a good lot ofmoney for it, I will send that to him.  If you hide the purse inyour pocket, no one will know that you have it.  If you can'tmanage it any other way, said the peasant, I will do you thatfavor.  Justsit still where you are, said she, and I will drive home and fetchthe purse, I shall soon be back again.  I do not sit down on thebundle of straw, but stand up in the waggon, because it makes itlighter for the cattle.
She drove her oxen away, and the peasantthought, that woman has a perfect talent for folly, if she reallybrings the money, my wife may think herself fortunate, for shewill get no beating.  It was not long before she came in a greathurry with the money, and with her own hands put it in his pocket.Before she went away, she thanked him again a thousand times forhis courtesy.
When the woman got home again, she found her son who had come infrom the field.  She told him what unexpected things had befallenher, and then added, I am truly delighted at having found anopportunity of sending something to my poor husband.  Who wouldever have imagined that he could be suffering for want of anythingup in heaven.  The son was full of astonishment.  Mother, said he,it is not every day that a man comes from heaven in this way, Iwill go out immediately, and see if he is still to be found, hemust tell me what it is like up there, and how the work is done.
He saddled the horse and rode off with all speed.  He found thepeasant who was sitting under a willow-tree, and was about tocount the money in the purse.  Have you seen the man who hasfallen down from heaven, cried the youth to him.  Yes, answered thepeasant, he has set out on his way back there, and has gone upthat hill, from whence it will be rather nearer, you could stillcatch him up, if you were to ride fast.  Alas, said the youth, Ihave been doing tiring work all day, and the ride here hascompletely worn me out, you know the man, be so kind as to get onmy horse, and go and persuade him to come here.  Aha, thought thepeasant, here is another who has not a brain in his head.  Whyshould I not do you this favor, said he, and mounted the horse androde off at a quick trot.  The youth remained sitting there tillnight fell, but the peasant never came back.  The man from heavenmust certainly have been in a great hurry, and would not turn back,thought he, and the peasant has no doubt givenhim the horse to take to my father.  He went home and told hismother what had happened, and that he had sent his father thehorse so that he might not have to be always running about.  Youhave done well, answered she, your legs are younger than his, andyou can go on foot.
When the peasant got home, he put the horse in the stable besidethe cow which he had as a pledge, and then went to his wife andsaid, trina, as your luck would have it, I have found two whoare still sillier fools than you, this time you escape withouta beating.  I will store it up for another occasion.  Then helighted his pipe, sat down in his grandfather's chair, and said,it was a good stroke of business to get a sleek horse and a greatpurse full of money into the bargain, for two lean cows.  Ifstupidity always brought in as much as that, I would be quitewilling to hold it in honor.  So thought the peasant, but youno doubt prefer simpletons.There was once a little child whose mother gave her everyafternoon a small bowl of milk and bread, and the child seatedherself in the yard with it.  But when she began to eat,a paddock came creeping out of a crevice in the wall, dipped itslittle head in the dish, and ate with her.  The child took pleasurein this, and when she was sitting there with her little dish andthe paddock did not come at once, she cried,               paddock, paddock, come swiftly               hither come, thou tiny thing,               thou shalt have thy crumbs of bread,               thou shalt refresh thyself with milk.
Then the paddock came in haste, and enjoyed its food.  It evenshowed gratitude, for it brought the child all kinds of prettythings from its hidden treasures, bright stones, pearls, and goldenplaythings.  The paddock, however, drank only the milk, and leftthe bread-crumbs alone.  Then one day the child took its littlespoon and struck the paddock gently on its head, and said, eat thebread-crumbs as well, little thing.  The mother, who was standingin the kitchen, heard the child talking to someone, and when shesaw that she was striking a paddock with her spoon, ran out witha log of wood, and killed the good little creature.
From that time forth, a change came over the child.  As long asthe paddock had eaten with her, she had grown tall and strong, butnow she lost her pretty rosy cheeks and wasted away.  It was notlong before the funeral bird began to cry in the night, and theredbreast to collect little branches and leaves for a funeralwreath and soon afterwards the child lay on her bier.
                         IIAn orphan child was sitting by the town walls spinning, when shesaw a paddock coming out of a hole low down in the wall.  Swiftlyshe spread out beside it one of the blue silk handkerchiefs forwhich paddocks have such a strong liking, and which are the onlythings they will creep on.  As soon as the paddock saw it, itwent back, then returned, bringing with it a small golden crown,laid it on the handkerchief, and then went away again.  The girl tookup the crown, which glittered and was of delicate golden filagreework.  It was not long before the paddock came back for the secondtime, but when it did not see the crown any more, it crept upto the wall, and in its grief smote its little head against itas long as it had strength to do so, until at last it lay theredead.  If the girl had but left the crown where it was, the paddockwould certainly have brought still more of its treasures out ofthe hole.
                         IIIThe paddock cries, huhu, huhu.  The child says, come out.  Thepaddock comes out, whereupon the child inquires about her littlesister, have you not seen little red-stockings.  The paddock says,no, I have not.  Have you.  Huhu, huhu, huhu.In a certain mill lived an old miller who had neither wife nor child,and three apprentices served under him.  As they had been with himseveral years, he one day said to them, "I am old, and want to sitbehind the stove.  Go out, and whichsoever of you brings me the besthorse home, to him will I give the mill, and in return for it heshall take care of me till my death."
The third of the boys, however, was the dunce, who was looked on asfoolish by the others, they begrudged the mill to him, and afterwardshe would not even have it.  Then all three went out together, andwhen they came to the village, the two said to stupid Hans, "You mayjust as well stay here, as long as you live you will never get ahorse." Hans, however, went with them, and when it was night theycame to a cave in which they lay down to sleep.  The two smart oneswaited until Hans had fallen asleep, then they got up, and went awayleaving him where he was.  And they thought they had done a veryclever thing, but it was certain to turn out ill for them.
When the sun rose, and Hans woke up, he was lying in a deep cavern.He looked around on every side and exclaimed, "Oh, heavens, where amI?" Then he got up and clambered out of the cave, went into theforest, and thought, "Here I am quite alone and deserted, how shall Iobtain a horse now?" Whilst he was thus walking full of thought, hemet a small tabby-cat which said quite kindly, "Hans, where are yougoing?" "Alas, you can not help me." "I well know your desire," saidthe cat.  "You wish to have a beautiful horse.  Come with me, and bemy faithful servant for seven years long, and then I will give youone more beautiful than any you have ever seen in your whole life.""Well, this is a strange cat," thought Hans, "But I am determined tosee if she is telling the truth."
So she took him with her into her enchanted castle, where there werenothing but kittens who were her servants.  They leapt nimblyupstairs and downstairs, and were merry and happy.  In the eveningwhen they sat down to dinner, three of them had to make music.  Oneplayed the bass viol, the other the fiddle, and the third put thetrumpet to his lips, and blew out his cheeks as much as he possiblycould.  When they had dined, the table was carried away, and the catsaid, "Now, Hans, come and dance with me." "No," said he, "I won'tdance with a pussy cat.  I have never done that yet." "Then take himto bed," said she to the cats.  So one of them lighted him to hisbed-room, one pulled his shoes off, one his stockings, and at lastone of them blew out the candle.  Next morning they returned andhelped him out of bed, one put his stockings on for him, one tied hisgarters, one brought his shoes, one washed him, and one dried hisface with her tail.  "That feels very soft," said Hans.
He, however, had to serve the cat, and chop some wood every day, andto do that, he had an axe of silver, and the wedge and saw were ofsilver and the mallet of copper.  So he chopped the wood small,stayed there in the house and had good meat and drink, but never sawanyone but the tabby-cat and her servants.  Once she said to him, "Goand mow my meadow, and dry the grass," and gave him a scythe ofsilver, and a whetstone of gold, but bade him deliver them up againcarefully.  So Hans went thither, and did what he was bidden, andwhen he had finished the work, he carried the scythe, whetstone, andhay to the house, and asked if it was not yet time for her to givehim his reward.  "No," said the cat, "you must first do somethingmore for me of the same kind.  There is timber of silver, carpenter'saxe, square, and everything that is needful, all of silver - withthese build me a small house." Then Hans built the small house, andsaid that he had now done everything, and still he had no horse.
Nevertheless the seven years had gone by with him as if they were sixmonths.  The cat asked him if he would like to see her horses. "Yes,"said Hans.  Then she opened the door of the small house, and when shehad opened it, there stood twelve horses, - such horses, so brightand shining, that his heart rejoiced at the sight of them.  And nowshe gave him to eat and drink, and said, "Go home, I will not giveyou your horse now, but in three days, time I will follow you andbring it." So Hans set out, and she showed him the way to the mill.
She, however, had never once given him a new coat, and he had beenobliged to keep on his dirty old smock, which he had brought withhim, and which during the seven years had everywhere become too smallfor him.  When he reached home, the two other apprentices were thereagain as well, and each of them certainly had brought a horse withhim, but one of them was a blind one, and the other lame.  They askedHans where his horse was.  "It will follow me in three days, time."Then they laughed and said, "Indeed, stupid Hans, where will you geta horse?" "It will be a fine one." Hans went into the parlor, but themiller said he should not sit down to table, for he was so ragged andtorn, that they would all be ashamed of him if any one came in.  Sothey gave him a mouthful of food outside, and at night, when theywent to rest, the two others would not let him have a bed, and atlast he was forced to creep into the goose-house, and lie down on alittle hard straw.
In the morning when he awoke, the three days had passed, and a coachcame with six horses and they shone so bright that it was delightfulto see them - and a servant brought a seventh as well, which was forthe poor miller's boy.  And a magnificent princess alighted from thecoach and went into the mill, and this princess was the littletabby-cat whom poor Hans had served for seven years.  She asked themiller where the miller's boy and dunce was.  Then the miller said,"We cannot have him here in the mill, for he is so ragged, he islying in the goose-house." Then the king's daughter said that theywere to bring him immediately.  So they brought him out, and he hadto hold his little smock together to cover himself.  The servantsunpacked splendid garments, and washed him and dressed him, and whenthat was done, no king could have looked more handsome.  Then themaiden desired to see the horses which the other apprentices hadbrought home with them, and one of them was blind and the other lame.So she ordered the servant to bring the seventh horse, and when themiller saw it, he said that such a horse as that had never yetentered his yard. "And that is for the third miller's boy," said she."Then he must have the mill," said the miller, but the king'sdaughter said that the horse was there, and that he was to keep hismill as well, and took her faithful Hans and set him in the coach,and drove away with him.
They first drove to the little house which he had built with thesilver tools, and behold it was a great castle, and everything insideit was of silver and gold, and then she married him, and he was rich,so rich that he had enough for all the rest of his life.  After this,let no one ever say that anyone who is silly can never become aperson of importance.Hill and vale do not meet, but the children of men do, good and bad.In this way a shoemaker and a tailor once met on their travels.  Thetailor was a handsome little fellow who was always merry and full ofenjoyment.  He saw the shoemaker coming towards him from the otherside, and as he observed by his bag what kind of a trade he plied, hesang a little mocking song to him,     sew me the seam,     draw me the thread,     spread it over with pitch,     knock the nail on the head.
The shoemaker, however, could not bear a joke, he pulled a face as ifhe had drunk vinegar, and made a gesture as if he were about to seizethe tailor by the throat.  But the little fellow began to laugh,reached him his bottle, and said, "No harm was meant, take a drink,and swallow your anger down." The shoemaker took a very hearty drink,and the storm on his face began to clear away. He gave the bottleback to the tailor, and said, "I took a hearty gulp, they say itcomes from much drinking, but not from great thirst.  Shall we traveltogether?" "All right," answered the tailor, "if only it suits you togo into a big town where there is no lack of work." "That is justwhere I want to go," answered the shoemaker.  "In a small hamletthere is nothing to earn, and in the country, people like to gobarefoot." They traveled therefore onwards together, and always setone foot before the other like a weasel in the snow.
Both of them had time enough, but little to bite and to break. Whenthey reached a town they went about and paid their respects to thetradesmen, and because the tailor looked so lively and merry, and hadsuch fine red cheeks, every one gave him work willingly, and whenluck was good the master's daughters gave him a kiss beneath theporch, as well.  When he again fell in with the shoemaker, the tailorhad always the most in his bundle. The ill-tempered shoemaker made awry face, and thought, the greater the rascal the more the luck.  Butthe tailor began to laugh and to sing, and shared all he got with hiscomrade.  If a couple of pence jingled in his pockets, he orderedgood cheer, and thumped the table in his joy till the glasses dancedand it was lightly come, lightly go, with him.
When they had traveled for some time, they came to a great forestthrough which passed the road to the capital.  Two foot-paths,however, led through it, one of which was a seven days, journey andthe other only two, but neither of the travelers knew which way wasthe short one.  They seated themselves beneath an oak-tree, and tookcounsel together how they should forecast, and for how many days theyshould provide themselves with bread.
The shoemaker said, "One must look before one leaps, I will take withme bread for a week." "What," said the tailor, "drag bread for sevendays on one's back like a beast of burden and not be able to lookabout?  I shall trust in God, and not trouble myself about anything.The money I have in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter, butin hot weather bread gets dry, and moldy into the bargain, even mycoat does not last as far as it might.  Besides, why should we notfind the right way?  Bread for two days, and that's enough." Each,therefore, bought his own bread, and then they tried their luck inthe forest.
It was as quiet there as in a church.  No wind stirred, no brookmurmured, no bird sang, and through the thickly-leaved branches nosunbeam forced its way.  The shoemaker spoke never a word, the breadweighed so heavily on his back that the sweat streamed down his crossand gloomy face.  The tailor, however, was quite merry, he jumpedabout, whistled on a leaf, or sang a song, and thought to himself,God in heaven must be pleased to see me so happy.
This lasted two days, but on the third the forest would not come toan end, and the tailor had eaten up all his bread, so after all hisheart sank down a yard deeper.  Nevertheless, he did not losecourage, but relied on God and on his luck.  On the evening of thethird day he lay down hungry under a tree, and rose again nextmorning hungry still, so also passed the fourth day, and when theshoemaker seated himself on a fallen tree and devoured his dinner thetailor was only a spectator.  If he begged for a little piece ofbread, the other laughed mockingly, and said, "You have always beenso merry, now you can see for once what it is to be sad, the birdswhich sing too early in the morning are struck by the hawk in theevening." In short, he was pitiless.  But on the fifth morning thepoor tailor could no longer stand up, and was hardly able to utterone word for weakness, his cheeks were white, and his eyes were red.Then the shoemaker said to him, "I will give you a bit of breadto-day, but in return for it, I will put out your right eye." Theunhappy tailor who still wished to save his life, had to submit, hewept once more with both eyes, and then held them out, and theshoemaker, who had a heart of stone, put out his right eye with asharp knife.  The tailor called to remembrance what his mother hadformerly said to him when he had been eating secretly in the pantry.Eat what one can, and suffer what one must.  When he had consumed hisdearly-bought bread, he got on his legs again, forgot his misery andcomforted himself with the thought that he could always see enoughwith one eye.
But on the sixth day, hunger made itself felt again and gnawed himalmost to the heart.  In the evening he fell down by a tree, and onthe seventh morning he could not raise himself up for faintness, anddeath was close at hand.  Then said the shoemaker, "I will show mercyand give you bread once more, but you shall not have it for nothing,I shall put out your other eye for it."
And now the tailor felt how thoughtless his life had been, prayed toGod for forgiveness, and said, "Do what you will, I will bear what Imust, but remember that our Lord God does not always look onpassively, and that an hour will come when the evil deed which youhave done to me, and which I have not deserved of you, will berequited.  When times were good with me, I shared what I had withyou.  My trade is of that kind that each stitch must always beexactly like the other.  If I no longer have my eyes and can sew nomore I must go a-begging.  At any rate do not leave me here alonewhen I am blind, or I shall die of hunger." The shoemaker, however,who had driven God out of his heart, took the knife and put out hisleft eye.  Then he gave him a bit of bread to eat, held out a stickto him, and drew him on behind him.
When the sun went down, they got out of the forest, and before themin the open country stood the gallows.  Thither the shoemaker guidedthe blind tailor, and then left him alone and went his way.Weariness, pain, and hunger made the wretched man fall asleep, and heslept the whole night.  When day dawned he awoke, but knew not wherehe lay.  Two poor sinners were hanging on the gallows, and a crow saton the head of each of them.  Then one of the men who had been hangedbegan to speak, and said, "Brother, are you awake?" "Yes, I amawake," answered the second.  "Then I will tell you something," saidthe first, "the dew which this night has fallen down over us from thegallows, gives every one who washes himself with it his eyes again.If blind people did but know this, how many would regain their sightwho do not believe that to be possible."
When the tailor heard that, he took his pocket-handkerchief, pressedit on the grass, and when it was moist with dew, washed the socketsof his eyes with it.  Immediately was fulfilled what the man on thegallows had said, and a couple of healthy new eyes filled thesockets.  It was not long before the tailor saw the sun rise behindthe mountains, in the plain before him lay the great royal city withits magnificent gates and hundred towers, and the golden balls andcrosses which were on the spires began to shine.  He coulddistinguish every leaf on the trees, saw the birds which flew past,and the midges which danced in the air. He took a needle out of hispocket, and as he could thread it as well as ever he had done, hisheart danced with delight.  He threw himself on his knees, thankedGod for the mercy he had shown him, and said his morning prayer.  Nordid he forget to pray for the poor sinners who were hanging thereswinging against each other in the wind like the pendulums of clocks.Then he took his bundle on his back and soon forgot the pain of hearthe had endured, and went on his way singing and whistling.
The first thing he met was a brown foal running about the fields atlarge.  He caught it by the mane, and wanted to spring on it and rideinto the town.  The foal, however, begged to be set free.  "I amstill too young," it said, "even a light tailor such as you are wouldbreak my back in two - let me go till I have grown strong.  A timemay perhaps come when I may reward you for it." "Run off," said thetailor, "I see you are still a giddy thing." He gave it a touch witha switch over its back, whereupon it kicked up its hind legs for joy,leapt over hedges and ditches, and galloped away into the opencountry.
But the little tailor had eaten nothing since the day before. The sunto be sure fills my eyes, said he, but the bread does not fill mymouth.  The first thing that comes my way and is even half ediblewill have to suffer for it.  In the meantime a stork stepped solemnlyover the meadow towards him.  "Halt, halt," cried the tailor, andseized him by the leg.  "I don't know if you are good to eat or not,but my hunger leaves me no great choice.  I must cut your head off,and roast you." "Don't do that," replied the stork, "I am a sacredbird which brings mankind great profit, and no one does me an injury.Leave me my life, and I may do you good in some other way." "Well, beoff, cousin longlegs," said the tailor.  The stork rose up, let itslong legs hang down, and flew gently away.
"What's to be the end of this," said the tailor to himself at last,"my hunger grows greater and greater, and my stomach more and moreempty.  Whatsoever comes in my way now is lost." At this point he sawa couple of young ducks which were on a pond come swimming towardshim.  "You come just at the right moment," said he, and laid hold ofone of them and was about to wring its neck.  On this an old duckwhich was hidden among the reeds, began to scream loudly, and swam tohim with open beak, and begged him urgently to spare her dearchildren.  "Can you not imagine," said she, "how your mother wouldmourn if any one wanted to carry you off, and give you your finishingstroke." "Just be quiet," said the good-tempered tailor, "you shallkeep your children," and put the prisoner back into the water.
When he turned round, he was standing in front of an old tree whichwas partly hollow, and saw some wild bees flying in and out of it."There I shall at once find the reward of my good deed," said thetailor, "the honey will refresh me." But the queen-bee came out,threatened him and said, "If you touch my people and destroy my nest,our stings shall pierce your skin like ten thousand red-hot needles.But if you leave us in peace and go your way, we will do you aservice for it another time."
The little tailor saw that here also nothing was to be done. Threedishes empty and nothing on the fourth is a bad dinner.  He draggedhimself therefore with his starved-out stomach into the town, and asit was just striking twelve, all was ready-cooked for him in the inn,and he was able to sit down at once to dinner. When he was satisfiedhe said, "Now I will get to work." He went round the town, sought amaster, and soon found a good situation. And as he had thoroughlylearnt his trade, it was not long before he became famous, and everyone wanted to have his new coat made by the little tailor, whoseimportance increased daily.  "I can go no further in skill," said he,"and yet things improve every day." At last the king appointed himcourt-tailor.
But what odd things do happen in the world.  On the very same day hisformer comrade the shoemaker also became court-shoemaker. When thelatter caught sight of the tailor, and saw that he had once more twohealthy eyes, his conscience troubled him.  "Before he takes revengeon me," thought he to himself, "I must dig a pit for him." He,however, who digs a pit for another, falls into it himself.  In theevening when work was over and it had grown dusk, he stole to theking and said, "Lord king, the tailor is an arrogant fellow and hasboasted that he will get the golden crown back again which was lostin ancient times." "That would please me very much," said the king,and he caused the tailor to be brought before him next morning, andordered him to get the crown back again, or to leave the town forever.  "Oho," thought the tailor, "a rogue gives more than he hasgot.  If the surly king wants me to do what can be done by no one, Iwill not wait till morning, but will go out of the town at once,to-day."
He packed up his bundle, therefore, but when he was without the gatehe could not help being sorry to give up his good fortune, and turnhis back on the town in which all had gone so well with him.  He cameto the pond where he had made the acquaintance of the ducks, at thatvery moment the old one whose young ones he had spared, was sittingthere by the shore, pluming herself with her beak. She knew him againinstantly, and asked why he was hanging his head so.  "You will notbe surprised when you hear what has befallen me," replied the tailor,and told her his fate.  "If that be all," said the duck, "we can helpyou.  The crown fell into the water, and it lies down below at thebottom, we will soon bring it up again for you.  In the meantime justspread out your handkerchief on the bank." She dived down with hertwelve young ones, and in five minutes she was up again and sat withthe crown resting on her wings, and the twelve young ones wereswimming round about and had put their beaks under it, and werehelping to carry it. They swam to the shore and put the crown on thehandkerchief. No one can imagine how magnificent the crown was, whenthe sun shone on it, it gleamed like a hundred thousand carbuncles.The tailor tied his handkerchief together by the four corners, andcarried it to the king, who was full of joy, and put a gold chainround the tailor's neck.
When the shoemaker saw that one blow had failed, he contrived asecond, and went to the king and said, "Lord king, the tailor hasbecome insolent again, he boasts that he will copy in wax the wholeof the royal palace, with everything that pertains to it, loose orfast, inside and out." The king sent for the tailor and ordered himto copy in wax the whole of the royal palace, with everything thatpertained to it, movable or immovable, within and without, and if hedid not succeed in doing this, or if so much as one nail on the wallwere wanting, he should be imprisoned for his whole life underground.
The tailor thought, "It gets worse and worse.  No one can endurethat," and threw his bundle on his back, and went forth.  When hecame to the hollow tree, he sat down and hung his head.  The beescame flying out, and the queen-bee asked him if he had a stiff neck,since he hung his head so.  "Alas, no," answered the tailor,"something quite different weighs me down," and he told her what theking had demanded of him.  The bees began to buzz and hum amongstthemselves, and the queen-bee said, "Just go home again, but comeback to-morrow at this time, and bring a large sheet with you, andthen all will be well." So he turned back again, but the bees flew tothe royal palace and straight into it through the open windows, creptround about into every corner, and inspected everything mostcarefully.  Then they hurried back and modelled the palace in waxwith such rapidity that any one looking on would have thought it wasgrowing before his eyes.  By the evening all was ready, and when thetailor came next morning, the whole of the splendid building wasthere, and not one nail in the wall or tile of the roof was wanting,and it was delicate withal, and white as snow, and smelt sweet ashoney.  The tailor wrapped it carefully in his cloth and took it tothe king, who could not admire it enough, placed it in his largesthall, and in return for it presented the tailor with a large stonehouse.
The shoemaker, however, did not give up, but went for the third timeto the king and said, "Lord king, it has come to the tailor's earsthat no water will spring up in the court-yard of the castle and hehas boasted that it shall rise up in the midst of the court-yard to aman's height and be clear as crystal." Then the king ordered thetailor to be brought before him and said, "If a stream of water doesnot rise in my court-yard by to-morrow as you have promised, theexecutioner shall in that very place make you shorter by a head." Thepoor tailor did not take long to think about it, but hurried out tothe gate, and because this time it was a matter of life and death tohim, tears rolled down his face.
While he was thus going forth full of sorrow, the foal to which hehad formerly given its liberty, and which had now become a beautifulchestnut horse, came leaping towards him.  "The time has come," itsaid to the tailor, "when I can repay you for your good deed.  I knowalready what is needful to you, but you shall soon have help, get onme, my back can carry two such as you." The tailor's courage cameback to him, he jumped up in one bound, and the horse went full speedinto the town, and right up to the court-yard of the castle. Itgalloped as quick as lightning thrice round it, and at the third timeit fell violently down.  At the same instant, however, there was aterrific clap of thunder, a fragment of earth in the middle of thecourt-yard sprang like a cannon-ball into the air, and over thecastle, and directly after it a jet of water rose as high as a man onhorseback, and the water was as pure as crystal, and the sunbeamsbegan to dance on it.  When the king saw this, he arose in amazement,and went and embraced the tailor in the sight of all men.
But good fortune did not last long.  The king had daughters inplenty, one still prettier than the other, but he had no son. So themalicious shoemaker betook himself for the fourth time to the king,and said, "Lord king, the tailor has not given up his arrogance.  Hehas now boasted that if he liked, he could cause a son to be broughtto the lord king through the air." The king commanded the tailor tobe summoned, and said, "If you cause a son to be brought to me withinnine days, you shall have my eldest daughter to wife." "The reward isindeed great," thought the little tailor, "one would willingly dosomething for it, but the cherries grow too high for me, if I climbfor them, the bough will break beneath me, and I shall fall."
He went home, seated himself cross-legged on his work-table, andthought over what was to be done.  "It can't be managed," cried he atlast, "I will go away, after all, I can't live in peace here." Hetied up his bundle and hurried away to the gate.  When he got to themeadow, he perceived his old friend the stork, who was walkingbackwards and forwards like a philosopher.  Sometimes he stood still,took a frog into close consideration, and at length swallowed itdown.  The stork came to him and greeted him.  "I see," he began,"that you have your pack on your back.  Why are you leaving thetown?" The tailor told him what the king had required of him, and howhe could not perform it, and lamented his misfortune. "Don't let thatturn your hair grey," said the stork, "I will help you out of yourdifficulty.  For a long time now, I have carried the children inswaddling-clothes into the town, so for once in a way, I can fetch alittle prince out of the well.  Go home and be easy.  In nine daysfrom this time repair to the royal palace, and there will I come."The little tailor went home, and at the appointed time was at thecastle.  It was not long before the stork came flying thither andtapped at the window.  The tailor opened it, and cousin longlegs camecarefully in, and walked with solemn steps over the smooth marblepavement.  He had, moreover, a baby in his beak that was as lovely asan angel, and stretched out its little hands to the queen.  The storklaid it in her lap, and she caressed it and kissed it, and was besideherself with delight.  Before the stork flew away, he took histraveling bag off his back and handed it over to the queen.  In itthere were little paper parcels with colored sweetmeats, and theywere divided amongst the little princesses.  The eldest, however,received none of them, but instead got the merry tailor for ahusband.  "It seems to me," said he, "just as if I had won thehighest prize.  My mother was if right after all, she always saidthat whoever trusts in God and only has good luck, can never fail."
The shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the little tailor dancedat the wedding festival, after which he was commanded to quit thetown for ever.  The road to the forest led him to the gallows.  Wornout with anger, rage, and the heat of the day, he threw himself down.When he had closed his eyes and was about to sleep, the two crowsflew down from the heads of the men who were hanging there, andpecked his eyes out.  In his madness he ran into the forest and musthave died there of hunger, for no one has ever either seen him orheard of him again.	Hans the Hedgehog
There was once a country man who had money and land in plenty, buthowever rich he was, his happiness was still lacking in one respect -he had no children.  Often when he went into the town with the otherpeasants they mocked him and asked why he had no children.  At lasthe became angry, and when he got home he said, "I will have a child,even if it be a hedgehog." Then his wife had a child that was ahedgehog in the upper part of his body and a boy in the lower, andwhen she saw the child, she was terrified, and said, "See, there youhave brought ill-luck on us." Then said the man, "What can be donenow?  The boy must be christened, but we shall not be able to get agodfather for him." The woman said, "And we cannot call him anythingelse but Hans the hedgehog."
When he was christened, the parson said, "He cannot go into anyordinary bed because of his spikes." So a little straw was put behindthe stove, and Hans the hedgehog was laid on it.  His mother couldnot suckle him, for he would have pricked her with his quills.  So helay there behind the stove for eight years, and his father was tiredof him and thought, if he would but die.  He did not die, however,but remained lying there.
Now it happened that there was a fair in the town, and the peasantwas about to go to it, and asked his wife what he should bring backwith him for her.  "A little meat and a couple of white rolls whichare wanted for the house," said she.  Then he asked the servant, andshe wanted a pair of slippers and some stockings with clocks. At lasthe said also, "And what will you have, Hans my hedgehog?" "Dearfather," he said, "do bring me bagpipes." When, therefore, the fathercame home again, he gave his wife what he had bought for her, meatand white rolls, and then he gave the maid the slippers, and thestockings with clocks, and, lastly, he went behind the stove, andgave Hans the hedgehog the bagpipes.
And when Hans the hedgehog had the bagpipes, he said, "Dear father,do go to the forge and get the cock shod, and then I will ride away,and never come back again." At this, the father was delighted tothink that he was going to get rid of him, and had the cock shod forhim, and when it was done, Hans the hedgehog got on it, and rodeaway, but took swine and asses with him which he intended to keep inthe forest.  When they got there he made the cock fly on to a hightree with him, and there he sat for many a long year, and watched hisasses and swine until the herd was quite large, and his father knewnothing about him.  And while he was sitting in the tree, he playedhis bagpipes, and made music which was very beautiful.
Once a king came traveling by who had lost his way and heard themusic.  He was astonished at it, and sent his servant forth to lookall round and see from whence this music came.  He spied about, butsaw nothing but a little animal sitting up aloft on the tree, whichlooked like a cock with a hedgehog on it which made this music.  Thenthe king told the servant he was to ask why he sat there, and if heknew the road which led to his kingdom.  So Hans the hedgehogdescended from the tree, and said he would show the way if the kingwould write a bond and promise him whatever he first met in the royalcourtyard as soon as he arrived at home.  Then the king thought, Ican easily do that, Hans the hedgehog understands nothing, and I canwrite what I like.  So the king took pen and ink and wrote something,and when he had done it, Hans the hedgehog showed him the way, and hegot safely home.  But his daughter, when she saw him from afar, wasso overjoyed that she ran to meet him, and kissed him.  Then heremembered Hans the hedgehog, and told her what had happened, andthat he had been forced to promise whatsoever first met him when hegot home, to a very strange animal which sat on a cock as if it werea horse, and made beautiful music, but that instead of writing thathe should have what he wanted, he had written that he should not haveit. Thereupon the princess was glad, and said he had done well, forshe never would have gone away with the hedgehog.
Hans the hedgehog, however, looked after his asses and pigs, and wasalways merry and sat on the tree and played his bagpipes. Now it cameto pass that another king came journeying by with his attendants andrunner, and he also had lost his way, and did not know how to gethome again because the forest was so large.  He likewise heard thebeautiful music from a distance, and asked his runner what that couldbe, and told him to go and see.  Then the runner went under the tree,and saw the cock sitting at the top of it, and Hans the hedgehog onthe cock.  The runner asked him what he was doing up there.  I amkeeping my asses and my pigs, but what is your desire.  The messengersaid that they had lost their way, and could not get back into theirown kingdom, and asked if he would not show them the way.  Then Hansthe hedgehog descended the tree with the cock, and told the aged kingthat he would show him the way, if he would give him for his ownwhatsoever first met him in front of his royal palace.  The kingsaid, "Yes," and wrote a promise to Hans the hedgehog that he shouldhave this.  That done, Hans rode on before him on the cock, andpointed out the way, and the king reached his kingdom again insafety.  When he got to the courtyard, there were great rejoicings.Now he had an only daughter who was very beautiful, she ran to meethim, threw her arms round his neck, and was delighted to have her oldfather back again.  She asked him where in the world he had been solong.  So he told her how he had lost his way, and had very nearlynot come back at all, but that as he was traveling through a greatforest, a creature, half hedgehog, half man, who was sitting astridea cock in a high tree, and making music, had shown him the way andhelped him to get out, but that in return he had promised himwhatsoever first met him in the royal court-yard, and how that wasshe herself, which made him unhappy now.  But on this she promisedthat, for love of her father, she would willingly go with this Hansif he came.
Hans the hedgehog, however, took care of his pigs, and the pigsbecame more pigs until there were so many in number that the wholeforest was filled with them.  Then Hans the hedgehog resolved not tolive in the forest any longer, and sent word to his father to haveevery stye in the village emptied, for he was coming with such agreat herd that all might kill who wished to do so.  When his fatherheard that, he was troubled, for he thought Hans the hedgehog haddied long ago.  Hans the hedgehog, however, seated himself on thecock, and drove the pigs before him into the village, and ordered theslaughter to begin.
Ha. - Then there was a butchery and a chopping that might have beenheard two miles off.  After this Hans the hedgehog said, "Father, letme have the cock shod once more at the forge, and then I will rideaway and never come back as long as I live." Then the father had thecock shod once more, and was pleased that Hans the hedgehog wouldnever return again.
Hans the hedgehog rode away to the first kingdom.  There the king hadcommanded that whosoever came mounted on a cock and had bagpipes withhim should be shot at, cut down, or stabbed by everyone, so that hemight not enter the palace.  When, therefore, Hans the hedgehog cameriding thither, they all pressed forward against him with theirpikes, but he spurred the cock and it flew up over the gate in frontof the king's window and lighted there, and Hans cried that the kingmust give him what he had promised, or he would take both his lifeand his daughter's.  Then the king began to speak to his daughter,and to beg her to go away with Hans in order to save her own life andher father's.  So she dressed herself in white, and her father gaveher a carriage with six horses and magnificent attendants togetherwith gold and possessions.  She seated herself in the carriage, andplaced Hans the hedgehog beside her with the cock and the bagpipes,and then they took leave and drove away, and the king thought heshould never see her again.  But he was deceived in his expectationfor when they were at a short distance from the town, Hans thehedgehog took her pretty clothes off, and pierced her with hishedgehog's spikes until she bled all over.  "That is the reward ofyour falseness," said he. "Go your way, I will not have you," and onthat he chased her home again, and she was disgraced for the rest ofher life.
Hans the hedgehog, however, rode on further on the cock, with hisbagpipes, to the dominions of the second king to whom he had shownthe way.  But this one had arranged that if any one resembling Hansthe hedgehog should come, they were to present arms, give him safeconduct, cry long life to him, and lead him to the royal palace.
But when the king's daughter saw him she was terrified, for he reallylooked too strange.  Then she remembered that she could not changeher mind, for she had given her promise to her father. So Hans thehedgehog was welcomed by her, and married to her, and had to go withher to the royal table, and she seated herself by his side, and theyate and drank.  When the evening came and they wanted to go to sleep,she was afraid of his quills, but he told her she was not to fear,for no harm would befall her, and he told the old king that he was toappoint four men to watch by the door of the chamber, and light agreat fire, and when he entered the room and was about to get intobed, he would creep out of his hedgehog's skin and leave it lyingthere by the bedside, and that the men were to run nimbly to it,throw it in the fire, and stay by it until it was consumed.
When the clock struck eleven, he went into the chamber, stripped offthe hedgehog's skin, and left it lying by the bed.  Then came the menand fetched it swiftly, and threw it in the fire, and when the firehad consumed it, he was saved, and lay there in bed in human form,but he was coal-black as if he had been burnt.  The king sent for hisphysician who washed him with precious salves, and anointed him, andhe became white, and was a handsome young man.  When the king'sdaughter saw that she was glad, and the next morning they arosejoyfully, ate and drank, and then the marriage was properlysolemnized, and Hans the hedgehog received the kingdom from the agedking.
When several years had passed he went with his wife to his father,and said that he was his son.  The father, however, declared he hadno son - he had never had but one, and he had been born like ahedgehog with spikes, and had gone forth into the world. Then Hansmade himself known, and the old father rejoiced and went with him tohis kingdom.                    My tale is done,                    and away it has run                    to little augusta's house.There was once a mother who had a little boy of seven years old, whowas so handsome and lovable that no one could look at him withoutliking him, and she herself worshipped him above everything in theworld.  Now it so happened that he suddenly became ill, and God tookhim to himself, and for this the mother could not be comforted andwept both day and night.  But soon afterwards, when the child hadbeen buried, it appeared by night in the places where it had sat andplayed during its life, and if the mother wept, it wept also, andwhen morning came it disappeared.  But as the mother would not stopcrying, it came one night, in the little white shroud in which it hadbeen laid in its coffin, and with its wreath of flowers round itshead, and stood on the bed at her feet, and said, "Oh, mother, dostop crying, or I shall never fall asleep in my coffin, for my shroudwill not dry because of all your tears, which fall upon it." Themother was afraid when she heard that, and wept no more.  The nextnight the child came again, and held a little light in its hand, andsaid, "Look, mother, my shroud is nearly dry, and I can rest in mygrave." Then the mother gave her sorrow into God's keeping, and boreit quietly and patiently, and the child came no more, but slept inits little bed beneath the earth.There was once a young fellow who had learnt the trade of locksmith,and told his father he would now go out into the world and seek hisfortune.  Very well, said the father, I am quite content with that,and gave him some money for his journey.  So he traveled about andlooked for work.  After a time he resolved not to follow the trade oflocksmith any more, for he no longer liked it, but he took a fancyfor hunting.
Then there met him in his rambles a huntsman dressed in green, whoasked whence he came and whither he was going.  The youth said he wasa locksmith's apprentice, but that the trade no longer pleased him,and he had a liking for huntsmanship, would he teach it to him.  "Oh,yes," said the huntsman, "if you will go with me." Then the youngfellow went with him, apprenticed himself to him for some years, andlearnt the art of hunting.  After this he wished to try his luckelsewhere, and the huntsman gave him nothing in the way of paymentbut an air-gun, which had, however, this property, that it hit itsmark without fail whenever he shot with it.  Then he set out andfound himself in a very large forest, which he could not get to theend of in one day.  When evening came he seated himself in a hightree in order to escape from the wild beasts.
Towards midnight, it seemed to him as if a tiny little lightglimmered in the distance.  Then he looked down through the branchestowards it, and kept well in his mind where it was.  But in the firstplace he took off his hat and threw it down in the direction of thelight, so that he might go to the hat as a mark when he haddescended.  He got down and went to his hat, put it on again and wentstraight forwards.  The farther he went, the larger the light grew,and when he got close to it he saw that it was an enormous fire, andthat three giants were sitting by it, who had an ox on the spit, andwere roasting it.  Presently one of them said, "I must just taste ifthe meat will soon be fit to eat," and pulled a piece off, and wasabout to put it in his mouth when the huntsman shot it out of hishand.  "Well, really," said the giant, "if the wind has not blown thebit out of my hand," and helped himself to another.  But when he wasjust about to bite into it, the huntsman again shot it away from him.On this the giant gave the one who was sitting next him a box on theear, and cried angrily, "Why are you snatching my piece away fromme?" "I have not snatched it away," said the other, "a sharpshootermust have shot it away from you."
The giant took another piece, but again could not keep it in hishand, for the huntsman shot it out.  Then the giant said, "That mustbe a good shot to shoot the bit out of one's very mouth, such an onewould be useful to us." And he cried aloud, "Come here, yousharpshooter, seat yourself at the fire beside us and eat your fill,we will not hurt you, but if you will not come, and we have to bringyou by force, you are a lost man."
On this the youth went up to them and told them he was a skilledhuntsman, and that whatever he aimed at with his gun, he was certainto hit.  Then they said if he would go with them he should be welltreated, and they told him that outside the forest there was a greatlake, behind which stood a tower, and in the tower was imprisoned alovely princess, whom they wished very much to carry off.  "Yes,"said he, "I will soon get her for you." Then they added, "But thereis still something else, there is a tiny little dog, which begins tobark directly any one goes near, and as soon as it barks every one inthe royal palace wakens up, and for this reason we cannot get there,can you undertake to shoot it dead?" "Yes," said he, "that will bequite fun for me." After this he got into a boat and rowed over thelake, and as soon as he landed, the little dog came running out, andwas about to bark, but the huntsman took his airgun and shot it dead.
When the giants saw that, they rejoiced, and thought they already hadthe king's daughter safe, but the huntsman wished first to see howmatters stood, and told them that they must stay outside until hecalled them.  Then he went into the castle, and all was perfectlyquiet within, and every one was asleep.  When he opened the door ofthe first room, a sword was hanging on the wall which was made ofpure silver, and there was a golden star on it, and the name of theking, and on a table near it lay a sealed letter which he broke open,and inside it was written that whosoever had the sword could killeverything which opposed him.  So he took the sword from the wall,hung it at his side and went onwards, then he entered the room wherethe king's daughter was lying sleeping, and she was so beautiful thathe stood still and, holding his breath, looked at her.  He thought tohimself, "How can I give an innocent maiden into the power of thewild giants, who have evil in their minds?" He looked about further,and under the bed stood a pair of slippers, on the right one was herfather's name with a star, and on the left her own name with a star.She wore also a large scarf of silk embroidered with gold, and on theright side was her father's name, and on the left her own, all ingolden letters.  Then the huntsman took a pair of scissors and cutthe right corner off, and put it in his knapsack, and then he alsotook the right slipper with the king's name, and thrust that in.  Nowthe maiden still lay sleeping, and she was quite sewn into hernight-dress, and he cut a morsel from this also, and thrust it inwith the rest, but he did all without touching her.
Then he went forth and left her lying asleep undisturbed, and when hecame to the gate again, the giants were still standing outsidewaiting for him, and expecting that he was bringing the princess.But he cried to them that they were to come in, for the maiden wasalready in their power, that he could not open the gate to them, butthere was a hole through which they must creep.  Then the firstapproached, and the huntsman wound the giant's hair round his hand,pulled the head in, and cut it off at one stroke with his sword, andthen drew the rest of him in.  He called to the second and cut hishead off likewise, and then he killed the third also, and he was wellpleased that he had freed the beautiful maiden from her enemies, andhe cut out their tongues and put them in his knapsack. Then thoughthe, "I will go home to my father and let him see what I have alreadydone, and afterwards I will travel about the world, the luck whichGod is pleased to grant me will easily find me."
But when the king in the castle awoke, he saw the three giants lyingthere dead.  So he went into the sleeping-room of his daughter, awokeher, and asked who could have killed the giants. Then said she, "Dearfather, I know not, I have been asleep." But when she arose and wouldhave put on her slippers, the right one was gone, and when she lookedat her scarf it was cut, and the right corner was missing, and whenshe looked at her night-dress a piece was cut out of it.  The kingsummoned his whole court together, soldiers and every one else whowas there, and asked who had set his daughter at liberty, and killedthe giants.
Now it happened that he had a captain, who was one-eyed and a hideousman, and he said that he had done it.  Then the old king said that ashe had accomplished this, he should marry his daughter.  But themaiden said, "Rather than marry him, dear father, I will go away intothe world as far as my legs can carry me." But the king said that ifshe would not marry him she should take off her royal garments andwear peasant's clothing, and go forth, and that she should go to apotter, and begin a trade in earthen vessels.
So she put off her royal apparel, and went to a potter and borrowedcrockery enough for a stall, and she promised him also that if shehad sold it by the evening, she would pay for it. Then the king saidshe was to seat herself in a corner with it and sell it, and hearranged with some peasants to drive over it with their carts, sothat everything should be broken into a thousand pieces.  Whentherefore the king's daughter had placed her stall in the street, bycame the carts, and broke all she had into tiny fragments.  She beganto weep and said, "Alas, how shall I ever pay for the pots now." Theking, however, had wished by this to force her to marry the captain;but instead of that, she again went to the potter, and asked him ifhe would lend to her once more.  He said, no, she must first pay forwhat she already had.
Then she went to her father and cried and lamented, and said shewould go forth into the world.  Then said he, "I will have a littlehut built for you in the forest outside, and in it you shall stay allyour life long and cook for every one, but you shall take no moneyfor it." When the hut was ready, a sign was hung on the door whereonwas written, to-day given, to-morrow sold.  There she remained a longtime, and it was rumored about the world that a maiden was there whocooked without asking for payment, and that this was set forth on asign outside her door.
The huntsman heard it likewise, and thought to himself, that wouldsuit you.  You are poor, and have no money.  So he took his air-gunand his knapsack, wherein all the things which he had formerlycarried away with him from the castle as tokens of his truthfulnesswere still lying, and went into the forest, and found the hut withthe sign, to-day given, to-morrow sold.  He had put on the sword withwhich he had cut off the heads of the three giants, and thus enteredthe hut, and ordered something to eat to be given to him.  He wascharmed with the beautiful maiden, who was indeed as lovely as anypicture.  She asked him whence he came and whither he was going, andhe said, "I am roaming about the world." Then she asked him where hehad got the sword, for that truly her father's name was on it.  Heasked her if she were the king's daughter.  "Yes," answered she."With this sword," said he, "did I cut off the heads of threegiants." And he took their tongues out of his knapsack in proof.Then he also showed her the slipper, and the corner of the scarf, andthe piece of the night-dress.
Hereupon she was overjoyed, and said that he was the one who haddelivered her.  On this they went together to the old king, andfetched him to the hut, and she led him into her room, and told himthat the huntsman was the man who had really set her free from thegiants.  And when the aged king saw all the proofs of this, he couldno longer doubt, and said that he was very glad he knew howeverything had happened, and that the huntsman should have her towife, on which the maiden was glad at heart.  Then she dressed thehuntsman as if he were a foreign lord, and the king ordered a feastto be prepared.  When they went to table, the captain sat on the leftside of the king's daughter, but the huntsman was on the right, andthe captain thought he was a foreign lord who had come on a visit.When they had eaten and drunk, the old king said to the captain thathe would set before him something which he must guess.  "Supposingsomeone said that he had killed the three giants and he were askedwhere the giants, tongues were, and he were forced to go and look,and there were none in their heads.  How could that have happened?"The captain said, "Then they cannot have had any." "Not so," said theking.  "Every animal has a tongue," and then he likewise asked whatpunishment should be meted out to anyone who made such an answer.The captain replied, "He ought to be torn in pieces." Then the kingsaid he had pronounced his own sentence, and the captain was put inprison and then torn in four pieces, but the king's daughter wasmarried to the huntsman. After this he brought his father and mother,and they lived with their son in happiness, and after the death ofthe old king he received the kingdom.There was once upon a time a king who had a little boy in whose starsit had been foretold that he should be killed by a stag when he wassixteen years of age, and when he had reached that age the huntsmenonce went hunting with him.  In the forest, the king's son wasseparated from the others, and all at once he saw a great stag whichhe wanted to shoot, but could not hit.  At length he chased the stagso far that they were quite out of the forest, and then suddenly agreat tall man was standing there instead of the stag, and said, "Itis well that I have you.  I have already ruined six pairs of glassskates with running after you, and have not been able to reach you."
Then he took the king's son with him, and dragged him through a greatlake to a great palace, and he had to sit down to table with him andeat something.  When they had eaten something together the king said,"I have three daughters, you must keep watch over the eldest for onenight, from nine in the evening till six in the morning, and everytime the clock strikes, I will come myself and call, and if you thengive me no answer, to-morrow morning you shall be put to death, butif you always give me an answer, you shall have her to wife."
When the young folks went to the bedroom there stood a stone image ofSt. Christopher, and the king's daughter said to it, "My father willcome at nine o'clock, and every hour till it strikes three, when hecalls, give him an answer instead of the king's son." Then the stoneimage of St. Christopher nodded its head quite quickly, and then moreand more slowly till at last it again stood still.  The next morningthe king said to him, "You have done the business well, but I cannotgive my daughter away. You must now watch a night by my seconddaughter, and then I will consider with myself, whether you can havemy eldest daughter to wife, but I shall come every hour myself, andwhen I call you, answer me, and if I call you and you do not reply,your blood shall flow."
Then they both went into the sleeping-room, and there stood a stilllarger stone image of St. Christopher, and the king's daughter saidto it, "If my father calls, answer him." Then the great stone imageof St. Christopher again nodded its head quite quickly and then moreand more slowly, until at last it stood still again.  And the king'sson lay down on the threshold, put his hand under his head and slept.The next morning the king said to him, "You have done the businessreally well, but I cannot give my daughter away, you must now watch anight by the youngest princess, and then I will consider with myselfwhether you can have my second daughter to wife.  But I shall comeevery hour myself, and when I call you answer me, and if I call youand you answer not, your blood shall flow for me."
Then they once more went to the sleeping-room together, and there wasa much greater and much taller image of St. Christopher than the twofirst had been.  The king's daughter said to it, "When my fathercalls, answer." Then the great tall stone image of St. Christophernodded quite half an hour with its head, until at length the headstood still again.  And the king's son laid himself down on thethreshold of the door and slept.  The next morning the king said,"You have indeed watched well, but I cannot give you my daughter now,I have a great forest, if you cut it down for me between six o'clockthis morning and six at night, I will think about it."
Then he gave him a glass axe, a glass wedge, and a glass mallet.When he got into the wood, he began at once to cut, but the axe brokein two.  Then he took the wedge, and struck it once with the mallet,and it became as short and as small as sand.  Then he was muchtroubled and believed he would have to die, and sat down and wept.
Now when it was noon the king said, "One of you girls must take himsomething to eat." "No," said the two eldest, "we will not take it tohim, the one by whom he last watched, can take him something." Thenthe youngest was forced to go and take him something to eat.  Whenshe got into the forest, she asked him how he was getting on.  "Oh,"said he, "I am getting on very badly." Then she said he was to comeand just eat a little. "Nay," said he, "I cannot do that, I have todie anyway, so I will eat no more." Then she spoke so kindly to himand begged him just to try, that he came and ate something.  When hehad eaten something she said, "I will pick your lice a while, andthen you will feel happier."
So she loused him, and he became weary and fell asleep, and then shetook her handkerchief and made a knot in it, and struck it threetimes on the earth, and said, "Earth-workers, come forth." In amoment, numbers of little earth-men came forth, and asked what theking's daughter commanded.  Then said she, "In three hours, time thegreat forest must be cut down, and all the wood laid in heaps." Sothe little earth-men went about and got together the whole of theirkindred to help them with the work. They began at once, and when thethree hours were over, all was done, and they came back to the king'sdaughter and told her so.  Then she took her white handkerchief againand said, "Earth-workers, go home." At this they all disappeared.
When the king's son awoke, he was delighted, and she said, "Come homewhen it has struck six o'clock." He did as she told him, and then theking asked, "Have you made away with the forest?" "Yes," said theking's son.  When they were sitting at table, the king said, "Icannot yet give you my daughter to wife, you must still do somethingmore for her sake." So he asked what it was to be.  "I have a greatfish-pond," said the king.  "You must go to it to-morrow morning andclear it of all mud until it is as bright as a mirror, and fill itwith every kind of fish."
The next morning the king gave him a glass shovel and said, "Thefish-pond must be done by six o'clock." So he went away, and when hecame to the fish-pond he stuck his shovel in the mud and it broke intwo.  Then he stuck his hoe in the mud, and it broke also.  Then hewas much troubled.  At noon the youngest daughter brought himsomething to eat, and asked him how he was getting on.  So the king'sson said everything was going very ill with him, and he wouldcertainly have to lose his head.  "My tools have broken to piecesagain." "Oh," said she, "you must just come and eat something, andthen you will be in another frame of mind." "No," said he, "I cannoteat, I am far too unhappy for that." Then she gave him many goodwords until at last he came and ate something.
Then she loused him again, and he fell asleep, so once more she tookher handkerchief, tied a knot in it, and struck the ground thricewith the knot, and said, "Earth-workers, come forth." In a moment agreat many little earth-men came and asked what she desired, and shetold them that in three hours, time, they must have the fish-pondentirely cleaned out, and it must be so clear that people could seethemselves reflected in it, and every kind of fish must be in it.The little earth-men went away and summoned all their kindred to helpthem, and in two hours it was done.  Then they returned to her andsaid, "We have done as you have commanded." The king's daughter tookthe handkerchief and once more struck thrice on the ground with it,and said, "earth-workers, go home again." Then they all went away.
When the king's son awoke the fish-pond was done.  Then the king'sdaughter went away also, and told him that when it was six he was tocome to the house.  When he arrived at the house the king asked,"Have you got the fish-pond done?" "Yes," said the king's son.  Thatwas very good.
When they were again sitting at table the king said, "You havecertainly done the fish-pond, but I cannot give you my daughter yet,you must just do one thing more." "What is that, then?" asked theking's son.  The king said he had a great mountain on which there wasnothing but briars which must all be cut down, and at the top of itthe youth must build a great castle, which must be as strong as couldbe conceived, and all the furniture and fittings belonging to acastle must be inside it.
And when he arose next morning the king gave him a glass axe and aglass gimlet, and he was to have all done by six o'clock.  As he wascutting down the first briar with the axe, it broke off short, and sosmall that the pieces flew all round about, and he could not use thegimlet either.  Then he was quite miserable, and waited for hisdearest to see if she would not come and help him in his need.  Whenit was mid-day she came and brought him something to eat.  He went tomeet her and told her all, and ate something, and let her louse himand fell asleep.
Then she once more took the knot and struck the earth with it, andsaid, "Earth-workers, come forth." Then came once again numbers ofearth-men, and asked what her desire was.  Then said she, "In thespace of three hours you must cut down the whole of the briars, and acastle must be built on the top of the mountain that must be asstrong as any one could conceive, and all the furniture that pertainsto a castle must be inside it." They went away, and summoned theirkindred to help them and when the time was come, all was ready.  Thenthey came to the king's daughter and told her so, and the king'sdaughter took her handkerchief and struck thrice on the earth withit, and said, "Earth-workers, go home, on which they alldisappeared." When therefore the king's son awoke and saw everythingdone, he was as happy as a bird in air.
When it had struck six, they went home together.  Then said the king,"Is the castle ready?" "Yes," said the king's son.  When they satdown to table, the king said, "I cannot give away my youngestdaughter until the two eldest are married." Then the king's son andthe king's daughter were quite troubled, and the king's son had noidea what to do.  But he went by night to the king's daughter and ranaway with her.  When they had got a little distance away, the king'sdaughter peeped round and saw her father behind her.  "Oh," said she,"what are we to do? My father is behind us, and will take us backwith him.  I will at once change you into a briar, and myself into arose, and I will shelter myself in the midst of the bush."
When the father reached the place, there stood a briar with one roseon it, and he was about to gather the rose, when the thorn prickedhis finger so that he was forced to go home again.  His wife askedwhy he had not brought their daughter back with him.  So he said hehad nearly got up to her, but that all at once he had lost sight ofher, and a briar with one rose was growing on the spot. Then said thequeen, "If you had but gathered the rose, the briar would have beenforced to come too." So he went back again to fetch the rose, but inthe meantime the two were already far over the plain, and the kingran after them.  Then the daughter once more looked round and saw herfather coming, and said, "Oh, what shall we do now?  I will instantlychange you into a church and myself into a priest, and I will standup in the pulpit, and preach." When the king got to the place, therestood a church, and in the pulpit was a priest preaching.  So helistened to the sermon, and then went home again.
Then the queen asked why he had not brought their daughter with him,and he said, "Nay, I ran a long time after her, and just as I thoughtI should soon overtake her, a church was standing there and a priestwas in the pulpit preaching." "You should just have brought thepriest," said his wife, "and then the church would soon have come.It is no use to send you, I must go there myself." When she hadwalked for some time, and could see the two in the distance, theking's daughter peeped round and saw her mother coming, and said,"Now we are undone, for my mother is coming herself, I willimmediately change you into a fish-pond and myself into a fish."
When the mother came to the place, there was a large fish-pond, andin the midst of it a fish was leaping about and peeping out of thewater, and it was quite merry.  She wanted to catch the fish, but shecould not.  Then she was very angry, and drank up the whole pond inorder to catch the fish, but it made her so ill that she was forcedto vomit, and vomited the whole pond out again.  Then she cried, "Isee very well that nothing can be done now, and asked them to comeback to her." Then the king's daughter went back again, and the queengave her daughter three walnuts, and said, "With these you can helpyourself when you are in your greatest need."
So the young folks once more went away together.  And when they hadwalked quite ten miles, they arrived at the castle from whence theking's son came, and near it was a village.  When they reached it,the king's son said, "Stay here, my dearest, I will just go to thecastle, and then will I come with a carriage and with attendants tofetch you."
When he got to the castle they all rejoiced greatly at having theking's son back again, and he told them he had a bride who was now inthe village, and they must go with the carriage to fetch her.  Thenthey harnessed the horses at once, and many attendants seatedthemselves outside the carriage.  When the king's son was about toget in, his mother gave him a kiss, and he forgot everything whichhad happened, and also what he was about to do. At this his motherordered the horses to be taken out of the carriage again, andeveryone went back into the house.  But the maiden sat in the villageand watched and watched, and thought he would come and fetch her, butno one came.  Then the king's daughter took service in the mill whichbelonged to the castle, and was obliged to sit by the pond everyafternoon and clean the tubs.
And the queen came one day on foot from the castle, and went walkingby the pond, and saw the well-grown maiden sitting there, and said,"What a fine strong girl that is.  She pleases me well." Then she andall with her looked at the maid, but no one knew her.  So a long timepassed by during which the maiden served the miller honorably andfaithfully.  In the meantime, the queen had sought a wife for herson, who came from quite a distant part of the world.  When the bridecame, they were at once to be married.  And many people hurriedtogether, all of whom wanted to see everything.  Then the girl saidto the miller that he might be so good as to give her leave to goalso.  So the miller said, "Yes, do go there." When she was about togo, she opened one of the three walnuts, and a beautiful dress layinside it. She put it on, and went into the church and stood by thealtar. Suddenly came the bride and bridegroom, and seated themselvesbefore the altar, and when the priest was just going to bless them,the bride peeped half round and saw the maiden standing there.  Thenshe stood up again, and said she would not be given away until shealso had as beautiful a dress as that lady there.
So they went back to the house again, and sent to ask the lady if shewould sell that dress.  No, she would not sell it, but the bridemight perhaps earn it.  Then the bride asked her how she was to dothis.  Then the maiden said if she might sleep one night outside theking's son's door, the bride might have what she wanted.  So thebride said, "Yes," she was willing to do that.  But the servants wereordered to give the king's son a sleeping draught, and then themaiden laid herself down on the threshold and lamented all nightlong.  She had had the forest cut down for him, she had had thefish-pond cleaned out for him, she had had the castle built for him,she had changed him into a briar, and then into a church, and at lastinto a fish-pond, and yet he had forgotten her so quickly.
The king's son did not hear one word of it, but the servants had beenawakened, and had listened to it, and had not known what it couldmean.  The next morning when they were all up, the bride put on thedress, and went away to the church with the bridegroom.  In themeantime the maiden opened the second walnut, and a still morebeautiful dress was inside it.  She put it on, and went and stood bythe altar in the church, and everything happened as it had happenedthe time before.  And the maiden again lay all night on the thresholdwhich led to the chamber of the king's son, and the servant was oncemore to give him a sleeping draught.  The servant, however, went tohim and gave him something to keep him awake, and then the king's sonwent to bed, and the miller's maiden bemoaned herself as before onthe threshold of the door, and told of all that she had done.  Allthis the king's son heard, and was sore troubled, and what was pastcame back to him.  Then he wanted to go to her, but his mother hadlocked the door.
The next morning, however, he went at once to his beloved, and toldher everything which had happened to him, and prayed her not to beangry with him for having forgotten her.  Then the king's daughteropened the third walnut, and within it was a still more magnificentdress, which she put on, and went with her bridegroom to church, andnumbers of children came who gave them flowers, and offered them gayribbons to bind about their feet, and they were blessed by thepriest, and had a merry wedding.  But the false mother and the bridehad to depart.  And the mouth of the person who last told all this isstill warm.There was once upon a time a princess who was extremely proud. If awooer came she gave him some riddle to guess, and if he could notguess it, he was sent contemptuously away.  She let it be made knownalso that whosoever solved her riddle should marry her, let him bewho he might.  At length, three tailors fell in with each other, thetwo eldest of whom thought they had done so many dexterous jobs ofwork successfully that they could not fail to succeed in this also,the third was a little, useless harum-scarum, who did not even knowhis trade, but thought he must have some luck in this venture, forwhere else was it to come from.  Then the two others said to him,just stay at home, you cannot do much with your little understanding.The little tailor, however, did not let himself be discouraged, andsaid he had set his mind to work on this for once, and he wouldmanage well enough, and he went forth as if the whole world were his.
They all three announced themselves to the princess, and said she wasto propound her riddle to them, and that the right persons were nowcome, who had understandings so fine that they could be threaded in aneedle.  Then said the princess, "I have two kinds of hair on myhead, of what color is it." "If that be all," said the first, "itmust be black and white, like the cloth which is called pepper andsalt." The princess said, "Wrongly guessed, let the second answer."Then said the second, "If it be not black and white, then it is brownand red, like my father's sunday coat." "Wrongly guessed," said theprincess, "let the third give the answer for I see very well he knowsit for certain." Then the little tailor stepped boldly forth andsaid, "The princess has a silver and a golden hair on her head, andthose are the two different colors."
When the princess heard that, she turned pale and nearly fell downwith terror, for the little tailor had guessed her riddle, and shehad firmly believed that no man on earth could discover it.  When hercourage returned she said, "You have not won me yet by that.  Thereis still something else that you must do.  Below, in the stable is abear with which you shall pass the night, and when I get up in themorning if you are still alive, you shall marry me." She expected,however, she would thus get rid of the tailor, for the bear had neveryet left anyone alive who had fallen into his clutches.  The littletailor did not let himself be frightened away, but was quitedelighted, and said, "Boldly ventured is half won."
So when the evening came, our little tailor was taken down to thebear.  The bear was about to set on the little fellow at once, andgive him a hearty welcome with his paws.  "Softly, softly," said thelittle tailor, "I will soon make you quiet." Then quite composedly,and as if he had no anxiety in the world, he took some nuts out ofhis pocket, cracked them, and ate the kernels.  When the bear sawthat, he was seized with a desire to have some nuts too.  The tailorfelt in his pockets, and reached him a handful, they were, however,not nuts, but pebbles.  The bear put them in his mouth, but could getnothing out of them, let him bite as he would.  "Eh," thought he,"what a stupid blockhead am I, I cannot even crack a nut." And thenhe said to the tailor, "Here, crack me the nuts." "There, see what astupid fellow you are," said the little tailor, "to have such a greatmouth, and not be able to crack a small nut." Then he took the pebbleand nimbly put a nut in his mouth in the place of it, and crack, itwas in two.  "I must try the thing again," said the bear, "when Iwatch you, I then think I ought to be able to do it too." So thetailor once more gave him a pebble, and the bear tried and tried tobite into it with all the strength of his body.  But even you do notbelieve that he managed it.
When that was over, the tailor took out a violin from beneath hiscoat, and played something to himself.  When the bear heard themusic, he could not help beginning to dance, and when he had danced awhile, the thing pleased him so well that he said to the littletailor, "Listen, is it difficult to fiddle?" "Easy enough for achild.  Look, with the left hand I lay my fingers on it, and with theright I stroke it with the bow, and then it goes merrily, hop sa savivallalera." "So," said the bear, "fiddling is a thing I should liketo learn too, that I might dance whenever I felt like it.  What doyou think of that?  Will you give me lessons?" "With all my heart,"said the tailor, "if you have a talent for it.  But just let me seeyour claws, they are terribly long, I must cut your nails a little."Then a vise was brought, and the bear put his claws in it, and thelittle tailor screwed it tight, and said, "Now wait until I come withthe scissors." And he let the bear growl as he liked, and lay down inthe corner on a bundle of straw, and fell asleep.
When the princess heard the bear growling so fiercely during thenight, she believed nothing else but that he was growling for joy,and had made an end of the tailor.  In the morning she arose carelessand happy, but when she peeped into the stable, the tailor stoodgaily before her, and was as healthy as a fish in water.  Now shecould not say another word against the wedding because she had givena promise before everyone, and the king ordered a carriage to bebrought in which she was to drive to church with the tailor, andthere she was to be married.
When they had climbed into the carriage, the two other tailors, whohad false hearts and envied him his good fortune, went into thestable and unscrewed the bear again.  The bear in great fury ranafter the carriage.  The princess heard snorting and growling.  Shewas terrified, and she cried, "Ah, the bear is behind us and wants toget you." The tailor was quick and stood on his head, stuck his legsout of the window, and cried, "Do you see the vise?  If you do not beoff you shall be put into it again." When the bear saw that, heturned round and ran away.  The tailor drove quietly to church, andthe princess was married to him at once, and he lived with her ashappy as a woodlark.  Whosoever does not believe this, must pay ataler.A tailor's apprentice was traveling about the world in search ofwork, and at one time he could find none, and his poverty was sogreat that he had not a farthing to live on.  Presently he met a Jewon the road, and as he thought he would have a great deal of moneyabout him, the tailor thrust God out of his heart, fell on the Jew,and said, give me your money, or I will strike you dead.  Then saidthe Jew, grant me my life, I have no money but eight farthings.  Butthe tailor said, money you have, and it shall be produced, and usedviolence and beat him until he was near death.  And when the Jew wasdying, the last words he said were, the bright sun will bring it tolight, and thereupon he died.  The tailor's apprentice felt in hispockets and sought for money, but he found nothing but eightfarthings, as the Jew had said.  Then he took him up and carried himbehind a clump of trees, and went onwards to seek work.  After he hadtraveled about a long while, he found work in a town with a masterwho had a pretty daughter, with whom he fell in love, and he marriedher, and lived in good and happy wedlock.
After a long time when he and his wife had two children, the wife'sfather and mother died, and the young people kept house alone.  Onemorning, when the husband was sitting on the table before the window,his wife brought him his coffee, and when he had poured it out intothe saucer, and was just going to drink, the sun shone on it and thereflection gleamed hither and thither on the wall above, and madecircles on it.  Then the tailor looked up and said, yes, it wouldlike very much to bring it to light, and cannot.  The woman said, o,dear husband, and what is that, then.  What do you mean by that.  Heanswered, I must not tell you.  But she said, if you love me, youmust tell me, and used her most affectionate words, and said that noone should ever know it, and left him no rest.  Then he told her howyears ago, when he was traveling about seeking work and quite wornout and penniless, he had killed a Jew, and that in the last agoniesof death, the Jew had spoken the words, the bright sun will bring itto light.  And now, the sun had just wanted to bring it to light, andhad gleamed and made circles on the wall, but had not been able to doit.  After this, he again charged her particularly never to tellthis, or he would lose his life, and she did promise.  However, whenhe had sat down to work again, she went to her great friend andconfided the story to her, and asked her never to repeat it to anyhuman being, but before three days were over, the whole town knew it,and the tailor was brought to trial, and condemned.  And thus, afterall, the bright sun did bring it to light.There was once on a time a soldier who for many years had served theking faithfully, but when the war came to an end could serve nolonger because of the many wounds which he had received.  The kingsaid to him, "You may return to your home, I need you no longer, andyou will not receive any more money, for he only receives wages whorenders me serve for them." Then the soldier did not know how to earna living, went away greatly troubled, and walked the whole day, untilin the evening he entered a forest.  When darkness came on, he saw alight, which he went up to, and came to a house wherein lived awitch.  "Do give me one night's lodging, and a little to eat anddrink," said he to her, "or I shall starve." "Oho," she answered,"who gives anything to a run-away soldier?  Yet will I becompassionate, and take you in, if you will do what I wish." "What doyou wish?" said the soldier.  "That you should dig all round mygarden for me, tomorrow." The soldier consented, and next day laboredwith all his strength, but could not finish it by the evening.  "Isee well enough," said the witch, "that you can do no more today, butI will keep you yet another night, in payment for which you musttomorrow chop me a load of wood, and chop it small." The soldierspent the whole day in doing it, and in the evening the witchproposed that he should stay one night more.  "Tomorrow, you shallonly do me a very trifling piece of work.  Behind my house, there isan old dry well, into which my light has fallen, it burns blue, andnever goes out, and you shall bring it up again."
Next day the old woman took him to the well, and let him down in abasket.  He found the blue light, and made her a signal to draw himup again.  She did draw him up, but when he came near the edge, shestretched down her hand and wanted to take the blue light away fromhim.  "No," said he, perceiving her evil intention, "I will not giveyou the light until I am standing with both feet upon the ground."The witch fell into a passion, let him fall again into the well, andwent away.
The poor soldier fell without injury on the moist ground, and theblue light went on burning, but of what use was that to him.  He sawvery well that he could not escape death.  He sat for a while verysorrowfully, then suddenly he felt in his pocket and found histobacco pipe, which was still half full.  "This shall be my lastpleasure," thought he, pulled it out, lit it at the blue light andbegan to smoke.  When the smoke had circled about the cavern,suddenly a little black dwarf stood before him, and said, "Lord, whatare your commands?" "What my commands are?" replied the soldier,quite astonished.  "I must do everything you bid me," said the littleman. "Good," said the soldier, "then in the first place help me outof this well." The little man took him by the hand, and led himthrough an underground passage, but he did not forget to take theblue light with him.  On the way the dwarf showed him the treasureswhich the witch had collected and hidden there, and the soldier tookas much gold as he could carry.  When he was above, he said to thelittle man, "Now go and bind the old witch, and carry her before thejudge."
In a short time she came by like the wind, riding on a wild tom-catand screaming frightfully.  Nor was it long before the little manre-appeared.  "It is all done," said he, "and the witch is alreadyhanging on the gallows.  What further commands has my lord," inquiredthe dwarf.  "At this moment, none," answered the soldier, "You canreturn home, only be at hand immediately, if I summon you." "Nothingmore is needed than that you should light your pipe at the bluelight, and I will appear before you at once." Thereupon he vanishedfrom his sight.
The soldier returned to the town from which he had come.  He went tothe best inn, ordered himself handsome clothes, and then bade thelandlord furnish him a room as handsome as possible. When it wasready and the soldier had taken possession of it, he summoned thelittle black mannikin and said, "I have served the king faithfully,but he has dismissed me, and left me to hunger, and now I want totake my revenge." "What am I to do?" asked the little man.  "Late atnight, when the king's daughter is in bed, bring her here in hersleep, she shall do servant's work for me." The mannikin said, "Thatis an easy thing for me to do, but a very dangerous thing for you,for if it is discovered, you will fare ill." When twelve o'clock hadstruck, the door sprang open, and the mannikin carried in theprincess.  "Aha, are you there?" cried the soldier, "Get to your workat once.  Fetch the broom and sweep the chamber." When she had donethis, he ordered her to come to his chair, and then he stretched outhis feet and said, "Pull off my boots," and then he threw them in herface, and made her pick them up again, and clean and brighten them.She, however, did everything he bade her, without opposition,silently and with half-shut eyes.  When the first cock crowed, themannikin carried her back to the royal palace, and laid her in herbed.
Next morning when the princess arose she went to her father, and toldhim that she had had a very strange dream.  "I was carried throughthe streets with the rapidity of lightning," said she, "and takeninto a soldier's room, and I had to wait upon him like a servant,sweep his room, clean his boots, and do all kinds of menial work.  Itwas only a dream, and yet I am just as tired as if I really had doneeverything." "The dream may have been true," said the king, "I willgive you a piece of advice.  Fill your pocket full of peas, and makea small hole in the pocket, and then if you are carried away again,they will fall out and leave a track in the streets." But unseen bythe king, the mannikin was standing beside him when he said that, andheard all.  At night when the sleeping princess was again carriedthrough the streets, some peas certainly did fall out of her pocket,but they made no track, for the crafty mannikin had just beforescattered peas in every street there was.  And again the princess wascompelled to do servant's work until cock-crow.
Next morning the king sent his people out to seek the track, but itwas all in vain, for in every street poor children were sitting,picking up peas, and saying, "It must have rained peas, last night.""We must think of something else," said the king, "keep your shoes onwhen you go to bed, and before you come back from the place where youare taken, hide one of them there, I will soon contrive to find it."The black mannikin heard this plot, and at night when the soldieragain ordered him to bring the princess, revealed it to him, and toldhim that he knew of no expedient to counteract this stratagem, andthat if the shoe were found in the soldier's house it would go badlywith him.  "Do what I bid you," replied the soldier, and again thisthird night the princess was obliged to work like a servant, butbefore she went away, she hid her shoe under the bed.
Next morning the king had the entire town searched for his daughter'sshoe.  It was found at the soldier's, and the soldier himself, who atthe entreaty of the dwarf had gone outside the gate, was soon broughtback, and thrown into prison.  In his flight he had forgotten themost valuable things he had, the blue light and the gold, and hadonly one ducat in his pocket. And now loaded with chains, he wasstanding at the window of his dungeon, when he chanced to see one ofhis comrades passing by.  The soldier tapped at the pane of glass,and when this man came up, said to him, "Be so kind as to fetch methat small bundle I have lying in the inn, and I will give you aducat for doing it."
His comrade ran thither and brought him what he wanted.  As soon asthe soldier was alone again, he lighted his pipe and summoned theblack mannikin.  "Have no fear," said the latter to his master.  "Gowheresoever they take you, and let them do what they will, only takethe blue light with you." Next day the soldier was tried, and thoughhe had done nothing wicked, the judge condemned him to death.  Whenhe was led forth to die, he begged a last favor of the king.  "Whatis it?" asked the king.  "That I may smoke one more pipe on my way.""You may smoke three," answered the king, "but do not imagine that Iwill spare your life." Then the soldier pulled out his pipe andlighted it at the blue light, and as soon as a few wreaths of smokehad ascended, the mannikin was there with a small cudgel in his hand,and said, "What does my lord command?" "Strike down to earth thatfalse judge there, and his constable, and spare not the king who hastreated me so ill." Then the mannikin fell on them like lightning,darting this way and that way, and whosoever was so much as touchedby his cudgel fell to earth, and did not venture to stir again.  Theking was terrified, he threw himself on the soldier's mercy, andmerely to be allowed to live at all, gave him his kingdom for hisown, and his daughter to wife.Once upon a time there was a child who was willful, and would not dowhat her mother wished.  For this reason God had no pleasure in her,and let her become ill, and no doctor could do her any good, and in ashort time she lay on her death-bed. When she had been lowered intoher grave, and the earth was spread over her, all at once her armcame out again, and stretched upwards, and when they had put it inand spread fresh earth over it, it was all to no purpose, for the armalways came out again.  Then the mother herself was obliged to go tothe grave, and strike the arm with a rod, and when she had done that,it was drawn in, and then at last the child had rest beneath theground.There was once a king's son, who was no longer content to stay athome in his father's house, and as he had no fear of anything, hethought, I will go forth into the wide world, there the time will notseem long to me, and I shall see wonders enough.  So he took leave ofhis parents, and went forth, and on and on from morning till night,and whichever way his path led it was the same to him.  It came topass that he arrived at the house of a giant, and as he was so tiredhe sat down by the door and rested. And as he let his eyes roam hereand there, he saw the giant's playthings lying in the yard.  Thesewere a couple of enormous balls, and nine-pins as tall as a man.After a while he had a fancy to set the nine-pins up and then rolledthe balls at them, and screamed and cried out when the nine-pinsfell, and had a merry time of it.
The giant heard the noise, stretched his head out of the window, andsaw a man who was not taller than other men, and yet played with hisnine-pins.  "Little worm," cried he, "why are you playing with myballs?  Who gave you strength to do it?" The king's son looked up,saw the giant, and said, "Oh, you blockhead, you think indeed thatyou only have strong arms, I can do everything I want to do." Thegiant came down and watched the bowling with great admiration, andsaid, "Child of man, if you are one of that kind, go and bring me anapple of the tree of life." "What do you want with it?" said theking's son.  "I do not want the apple for myself," answered thegiant, "but I have a betrothed bride who wishes for it.  I havetraveled far about the world and cannot find the tree." "I will soonfind it," said the king's son, "and I do not know what is to preventme from getting the apple down." The giant said, "You really believeit to be so easy.  The garden in which the tree stands is surroundedby an iron railing, and in front of the railing lie wild beasts, eachclose to the other, and they keep watch and let no man go in." "Theywill be sure to let me in," said the king's son.  "Yes, but even ifyou do get into the garden, and see the apple hanging to the tree, itis still not yours.  A ring hangs in front of it, through which anyone who wants to reach the apple and break it off, must put his hand,and no one has yet had the luck to do it." "That luck will be mine,"said the king's son. Then he took leave of the giant, and went forthover mountain and valley, and through plains and forests, until atlength he came to the wondrous garden.
The beasts lay round about it, but they had put their heads down andwere asleep.  Moreover, they did not awake when he went up to them,so he stepped over them, climbed the fence, and got safely into thegarden.  There, in the very middle of it, stood the tree of life, andthe red apples were shining upon the branches.  He climbed up thetrunk to the top, and as he was about to reach out for an apple, hesaw a ring hanging before it, but he thrust his hand through thatwithout any difficulty, and picked the apple.  The ring closedtightly on his arm, and all at once he felt a prodigious strengthflowing through his veins.  When he had come down again from the treewith the apple, he would not climb over the fence, but grasped thegreat gate, and had no need to shake it more than once before itsprang open with a loud crash.  Then he went out, and the lion whichhad been lying in front of the gate, was awake and sprang after him,not in rage and fierceness, but following him humbly as its master.
The king's son took the giant the apple he had promised him, andsaid, "You see, I have brought it without difficulty." The giant wasglad that his desire had been so soon satisfied, hastened to hisbride, and gave her the apple for which she had wished.  She was abeautiful and wise maiden, and as she did not see the ring on hisarm, she said, "I shall never believe that you have brought theapple, until I see the ring on your arm." The giant said, "I havenothing to do but go home and fetch it," and thought it would be easyto take away by force from the weak man, what he would not give ofhis own free will.  He therefore demanded the ring from him, but theking's son refused it.  "Where the apple is, the ring must be also,"said the giant. "If you will not give it of your own accord, you mustfight me for it."
They wrestled with each other for a long time, but the giant couldnot harm the king's son, who was strengthened by the magical power ofthe ring.  Then the giant thought of a ruse, and said, "I have gotwarm with fighting, and so have you.  We will bathe in the river, andcool ourselves before we begin again." The king's son, who knewnothing of falsehood, went with him to the water, and pulled off withhis clothes the ring also from his arm, and sprang into the river.The giant instantly snatched the ring, and ran away with it, but thelion, which had observed the theft, pursued the giant, tore the ringout of his hand, and brought it back to its master.  Then the giantplaced himself behind an oak-tree, and while the king's son was busyputting on his clothes again, surprised him, and put both his eyesout.
And now the unhappy king's son stood there, and was blind and knewnot how to help himself.  Then the giant came back to him, took himby the hand as if he were someone who wanted to guide him, and ledhim to the top of a high rock.  There he left him standing, andthought, "Just two steps more, and he will fall down and killhimself, and I can take the ring from him." But the faithful lion hadnot deserted its master.  It held him fast by the clothes, and drewhim gradually back again.
When the giant came and wanted to rob the dead man, he saw that hiscunning had been in vain.  "Is there no way, then, of destroying aweak child of man like that?" said he angrily to himself, and seizedthe king's son and led him back again to the precipice by anotherway, but the lion which saw his evil design, helped its master out ofdanger here also.  When they had come close to the edge, the giantlet the blind man's hand drop, and was going to leave him behindalone, but the lion pushed the giant so that he was thrown down andfell, dashed to pieces, on the ground.
The faithful animal again drew its master back from the precipice,and guided him to a tree by which flowed a clear brook.  The king'sson sat down there, but the lion lay down, and sprinkled the water inhis face with its paws.  Scarcely had a couple of drops wetted thesockets of his eyes, than he was once more able to see something, andnoticed a little bird flying quite close by, which hit itself againstthe trunk of a tree.  So it went down to the water and bathed itselftherein, and then it soared upwards and swept between the treeswithout touching them, as if it had recovered its sight.  Then theking's son recognized a sign from God and stooped down to the water,and washed and bathed his face in it.  And when he arose he had hiseyes once more, brighter and clearer than they had ever been.
The king's son thanked God for his great mercy, and traveled with hislion onwards through the world.  And it came to pass that he arrivedbefore a castle which was enchanted.  In the gateway stood a maidenof beautiful form and fine face, but she was quite black.  She spoketo him and said, "Ah, if you could but deliver me from the evil spellwhich is thrown over me." "What shall I do?" said the king's son.The maiden answered, "You must pass three nights in the great hall ofthis enchanted castle, but you must let no fear enter your heart.When they are doing their worst to torment you, if you bear itwithout letting a sound escape you, I shall be free.  Your life theydare not take." Then said the king's son, "I have no fear, with God'shelp I will try it." So he went gaily into the castle, and when itgrew dark he seated himself in the large hall and waited.
Everything was quiet, however, till midnight, when all at once agreat tumult began, and out of every hole and corner came littledevils.  They behaved as if they did not see him, seated themselvesin the middle of the room, lighted a fire, and began to gamble.  Whenone of them lost, he said, "It is not right, some one is here whodoes not belong to us, it is his fault that I am losing." "Wait, youfellow behind the stove, I am coming," said another.  The screamingbecame still louder, so that no one could have heard it withoutterror.  The king's son stayed sitting quite calmly, and was notafraid, but at last the devils jumped up from the ground, and fell onhim, and there were so many of them that he could not defend himselffrom them.  They dragged him about on the floor, pinched him, prickedhim, beat him, and tormented him, but no sound escaped from him.Towards morning they disappeared, and he was so exhausted that hecould scarcely move his limbs, but when day dawned the black maidencame to him.  She bore in her hand a little bottle wherein was thewater of life wherewith she washed him, and he at once felt all paindepart and new strength flow through his veins.  She said, "You haveheld out successfully for one night, but two more lie before you."Then she went away again, and as she was going, he observed that herfeet had become white.
The next night the devils came and began their gambling anew.  Theyfell on the king's son, and beat him much more severely than thenight before, until his body was covered with wounds.  But as he boreall quietly, they were forced to leave him, and when dawn appeared,the maiden came and healed him with the water of life.  And when shewent away, he saw with joy that she had already become white to thetips of her fingers.  And now he had only one night more to gothrough, but it was the worst. The devils came again, "Are you stillthere?" cried they. "You shall be tormented till your breath stops."They pricked him and beat him, and threw him here and there, andpulled him by the arms and legs as if they wanted to tear him topieces, but he bore everything, and never uttered a cry.  At last thedevils vanished, but he lay fainting there, and did not stir, norcould he raise his eyes to look at the maiden who came in, andsprinkled and bathed him with the water of life.  But suddenly he wasfreed from all pain, and felt fresh and healthy as if he had awakenedfrom sleep, and when he opened his eyes he saw the maiden standing byhim, snow-white, and fair as day.
"Rise," said she, "and swing your sword three times over the stairs,and then all will be delivered." And when he had done that, the wholecastle was released from enchantment, and the maiden was a richking's daughter.  The servants came and said that the table was setin the great hall, and dinner served up. Then they sat down and ateand drank together, and in the evening the wedding was solemnizedwith great rejoicings.There was once a young huntsman who went into the forest to lie inwait.  He had a fresh and joyous heart, and as he was going thither,whistling upon a leaf, an ugly old crone came up, who spoke to himand said, "Good-day, dear huntsman, truly you are merry andcontented, but I am suffering from hunger and thirst, do give me analms." The huntsman took pity on the poor old creature, felt in hispocket, and gave her what he could afford.
He was then about to go further, but the old woman stopped him andsaid, "Listen, dear huntsman, to what I tell you.  I will make you apresent in return for your good heart.  Go on your way now, but in alittle while you will come to a tree, whereon nine birds are sittingwhich have a cloak in their claws, and are fighting for it, take yourgun and shoot into the midst of them.  They will let the cloak falldown to you, but one of the birds will be hurt, and will drop downdead.  Carry away the cloak, it is a wishing-cloak.  When you throwit over your shoulders, you only have to wish to be in a certainplace, and you will be there in the twinkling of an eye.  Take outthe heart of the dead bird and swallow it whole, and every morningearly, when you get up, you will find a gold piece under yourpillow." The huntsman thanked the wise woman, and thought to himself,"Those are fine things that she has promised me, if all does but cometrue." And verily when he had walked about a hundred paces, he heardin the branches above him such a screaming and twittering that helooked up and saw there a swarm of birds who were tearing a piece ofcloth about with their beaks and claws, and tugging and fighting asif each wanted to have it all to himself.  "Well," said the huntsman,"this is amazing, it has really come to pass just as the old croneforetold," and he took the gun from his shoulder, aimed and firedright into the midst of them, so that the feathers flew about.  Thebirds instantly took to flight with loud outcries, but one droppeddown dead, and the cloak fell at the same time.  Then the huntsmandid as the old woman had directed him, cut open the bird, sought theheart, swallowed it down, and took the cloak home with him.
Next morning, when he awoke, the promise occurred to him, and hewished to see if it also had been fulfilled.  When he lifted up thepillow, the gold piece shone in his eyes, and next day he foundanother, and so it went on, every time he got up.  He gatheredtogether a heap of gold, but at last he thought, "Of what use is allmy gold to me if I stay at home?  I will go forth and see the world."
He then took leave of his parents, buckled on his huntsman's pouchand gun, and went out into the world.  It came to pass, that one dayhe traveled through a dense forest, and when he came to the end ofit, in the plain before him stood a fine castle.  An old woman wasstanding with a wonderfully beautiful maiden, looking out of one ofthe windows.  The old woman, however, was a witch and said to themaiden, "There comes one out of the forest, who has a wonderfultreasure in his body.  We must filch it from him, daughter of myheart, it is more suitable for us than for him.  He has a bird'sheart about him, by means of which a gold piece lies every morningunder his pillow." She told her what she was to do to get it, andwhat part she had to play, and finally threatened her, and said withangry eyes, "And if you do not attend to what I say, it will be theworse for you." Now when the huntsman came nearer he noticed themaiden, and said to himself, "I have traveled about for such a longtime, I will take a rest for once, and enter that beautiful castle.I have certainly money enough." Nevertheless, the real reason wasthat he had caught sight of the beautiful picture.
He entered the house, and was well received and courteouslyentertained.  Before long he was so much in love with the young witchthat he no longer thought of anything else, and only saw things asshe saw them, and liked to do what she desired.  The old woman thensaid, "Now we must have the bird's heart, he will never miss it." Shebrewed a potion, and when it was ready, poured it into a goblet andgave it to the maiden, who was to present it to the huntsman.  Shedid so, saying, "Now, my dearest, drink to me."
So he took the goblet, and when he had swallowed the draught, hebrought up the heart of the bird.  The girl had to take it awaysecretly and swallow it herself, for the old woman would have it so.Thenceforward he found no more gold under his pillow, but it layinstead under that of the maiden, from whence the old woman fetchedit away every morning, but he was so much in love and so befooled,that he thought of nothing else but of passing his time with thegirl.
Then the old witch said, "We have the bird's heart, but we must alsotake the wishing-cloak away from him." The girl answered, "We willleave him that, he has lost his wealth." The old woman was angry andsaid, "Such a mantle is a wonderful thing, and is seldom to be foundin this world.  I must and will have it." She gave the girl severalblows, and said that if she did not obey, it should fare ill withher.  So she did the old woman's bidding, placed herself at thewindow and looked on the distant country, as if she were verysorrowful.  The huntsman asked, "Why do you stand there sosorrowfully?" "Ah, my beloved," was her answer, "over yonder lies thegarnet mountain, where the precious stones grow.  I long for them somuch that when I think of them, I feel quite sad, but who can getthem.  Only the birds, they fly and can reach them, but a man never.""Have you nothing else to complain of?" said the huntsman.  "I willsoon remove that burden from your heart." With that he drew her underhis mantle, wished himself on the garnet mountain, and in thetwinkling of an eye they were sitting on it together.  Preciousstones were glistening on every side so that it was a joy to seethem, and together they gathered the finest and costliest of them.
Now, the old woman had, through her sorceries, contrived that theeyes of the huntsman should become heavy.  He said to the maiden, "Wewill sit down and rest awhile, I am so tired that I can no longerstand on my feet." Then they sat down, and he laid his head in herlap, and fell asleep. When he was asleep, she unfastened the mantlefrom his shoulders, and wrapped herself in it, picked up the garnetsand stones, and wished herself back at home with them.
But when the huntsman had slept his fill and awoke, and perceivedthat his sweetheart had betrayed him, and left him alone on the wildmountain, he said, "Oh, what treachery there is in the world," andsat down there in trouble and sorrow, not knowing what to do.  Butthe mountain belonged to some wild and monstrous giants who dweltthereon and lived their lives there, and he had not sat long beforehe saw three of them coming towards him, so he lay down as if he weresunk in a deep sleep.
Then the giants came up, and the first kicked him with his foot andsaid, "What sort of an earth-worm is this, lying here contemplatinghis inside?" The second said, "Step upon him and kill him." But thethird said, contemptuously, "That would indeed be worth your while,just let him live, he cannot remain here, and when he climbs higher,toward the summit of of the mountain, the clouds will lay hold of himand bear him away." So saying they passed by.  But the huntsman hadpaid heed to their words, and as soon as they were gone, he rose andclimbed up to the summit of the mountain, and when he had sat there awhile, a cloud floated towards him, caught him up, carried him away,and traveled about for a long time in the heavens.  Then it sanklower, and let itself down on a great cabbage-garden, girt round bywalls, so that he came softly to the ground on cabbages andvegetables.
Then the huntsman looked about him and said, "If I had but somethingto eat.  I am so hungry, and to proceed on my way from here will bedifficult.  I see here neither apples nor pears, nor any other sortof fruit, everywhere nothing but cabbages, but at length he thought,at a pinch I can eat some of the leaves, they do not tasteparticularly good, but they will refresh me." With that he pickedhimself out a fine head of cabbage, and ate it, but scarcely had heswallowed a couple of mouthfuls than he felt very strange and quitedifferent.
Four legs grew on him, a thick head and two long ears, and he sawwith horror that he was changed into an ass.  Still as his hungerincreased every minute, and as the juicy leaves were suitable to hispresent nature, he went on eating with great zest.  At last hearrived at a different kind of cabbage, but as soon as he hadswallowed it, he again felt a change, and resumed his former humanshape.
Then the huntsman lay down and slept off his fatigue.  When he awokenext morning, he broke off one head of the bad cabbages and anotherof the good ones, and thought to himself, this shall help me to getmy own again and punish treachery.  Then he took the cabbages withhim, climbed over the wall, and went forth to look for the castle ofhis sweetheart.  After wandering about for a couple of days he waslucky enough to find it again.  He dyed his face brown, so that hisown mother would not have known him, and begged for shelter, "I am sotired," said he, "that I can go no further." The witch asked, "Whoare you, countryman, and what is your business?" "I am a king'smessenger, and was sent out to seek the most delicious salad whichgrows beneath the sun.  I have even been so fortunate as to find it,and am carrying it about with me, but the heat of the sun is sointense that the delicate cabbage threatens to wither, and I do notknow if I can carry it any further."
When the old woman heard of the exquisite salad, she was greedy, andsaid, "Dear countryman, let me just try this wonderful salad." "Whynot?" answered he.  "I have brought two heads with me, and will giveyou one of them," and he opened his pouch and handed her the badcabbage.  The witch suspected nothing amiss, and her mouth watered sofor this new dish that she herself went into the kitchen and dressedit.  When it was prepared she could not wait until it was set on thetable, but took a couple of leaves at once, and put them in hermouth, but hardly had she swallowed them than she was deprived of herhuman shape, and she ran out into the courtyard in the form of anass.
Presently the maid-servant entered the kitchen, saw the saladstanding there ready prepared, and was about to carry it up, but onthe way, according to habit, she was seized by the desire to taste,and she ate a couple of leaves.  Instantly the magic power showeditself, and she likewise became an ass and ran out to the old woman,and the dish of salad fell to the ground.
Meantime the messenger sat beside the beautiful girl, and as no onecame with the salad and she also was longing for it, she said, "Idon't know what has become of the salad." The huntsman thought, thesalad must have already taken effect, and said, "I will go to thekitchen and inquire about it." As he went down he saw the two assesrunning about in the courtyard, the salad, however, was lying on theground. "All right," said he, "the two have taken their portion," andhe picked up the other leaves, laid them on the dish, and carriedthem to the maiden.  "I bring you the delicate food myself," said he,"in order that you may not have to wait longer." Then she ate of it,and was, like the others, immediately deprived of her human form, andran out into the courtyard in the shape of an ass.
After the huntsman had washed his face, so that the transformed onescould recognize him, he went down into the courtyard, and said, "Nowyou shall receive the wages of your treachery," and bound themtogether, all three with one rope, and drove them along until he cameto a mill.  He knocked at the window, the miller put out his head,and asked what he wanted.  "I have three unmanageable beasts,answered he, which I don't want to keep any longer.  Will you takethem in, and give them food and stable room, and manage them as Itell you, and then I will pay you what you ask?" The miller said,"Why not?  But how am I to manage them?" The huntsman then said thathe was to give three beatings and one meal daily to the old donkey,and that was the witch, one beating and three meals to the youngerone, which was the servant-girl, and to the youngest, which was themaiden, no beatings and three meals, for he could not bring himselfto have the maiden beaten. After that he went back into the castle,and found therein everything he needed.
After a couple of days, the miller came and said he must inform himthat the old ass which had received three beatings and only one mealdaily was dead.  The two others, he continued, are certainly notdead, and are fed three times daily, but they are so sad that theycannot last much longer.  The huntsman was moved to pity, put awayhis anger, and told the miller to drive them back again to him.  Andwhen they came, he gave them some of the good salad, so that theybecame human again.  The beautiful girl fell on her knees before him,and said, "Ah, my beloved, forgive me for the evil I have done you,my mother drove me to it.  It was done against my will, for I loveyou dearly.  Your wishing-cloak hangs in a cupboard, and as for thebird's-heart I will take a vomiting potion." But he thoughtotherwise, and said, "Keep it.  It is all the same, for I will takeyou for my true wife." So the wedding was celebrated, and they livedhappily together until their death.A poor servant-girl was once traveling with the family with which shewas in service, through a great forest, and when they were in themidst of it, robbers came out of the thicket, and murdered all theyfound.  All perished together except the girl, who had jumped out ofthe carriage in a fright, and hidden herself behind a tree.  When therobbers had gone away with their booty, she came out and beheld thegreat disaster.  Then she began to weep bitterly, and said, "What cana poor girl like me do now?  I do not know how to get out of theforest, no human being lives in it, so I must certainly starve."
She walked about and looked for a road, but could find none.  When itwas evening she seated herself under a tree, gave herself into God'skeeping, and resolved to sit waiting there and not go away, lethappen what might.  When she had sat there for a while, a white dovecame flying to her with a little golden key in its beak.  It put thelittle key in her hand, and said, "Do you see that great tree,therein is a little lock, open it with the tiny key, and you willfind food enough, and suffer no more hunger."
Then she went to the tree and opened it, and found milk in a littledish, and white bread to break into it, so that she could eat herfill.  When she was satisfied, she said, "It is now the time when thehens at home go to roost, I am so tired I could go to bed too." Thenthe dove flew to her again, and brought another golden key in itsbill, and said, "Open that tree there, and you will find a bed." Soshe opened it, and found a beautiful white bed, and she prayed God toprotect her during the night, and lay down and slept.
In the morning the dove came for the third time, and again brought alittle key, and said, "Open that tree there, and you will findclothes." And when she opened it, she found garments beset with goldand with jewels, more splendid than those of any king's daughter.  Soshe lived there for some time, and the dove came every day andprovided her with all she needed, and it was a quiet good life.
Then one day the dove came and said, "Will you do something for mysake?" "With all my heart," said the girl.  Then said the littledove, "I will guide you to a small house, enter it and inside it, anold woman will be sitting by the fire and will say, 'good-day.' Buton your life give her no answer, let her do what she will, but passby her on the right side. Further on, there is a door, which open,and you will enter into a room where a quantity of rings of all kindsare lying, amongst which are some magnificent ones with shiningstones.  Leave them, however, where they are, and seek out a plainone, which must likewise be amongst them, and bring it here to me asquickly as you can."
The girl went to the little house, and came to the door.  There satan old woman who stared when she saw her, and said, "Good-day mychild." The girl gave her no answer, and opened the door.  "Whitheraway?" cried the old woman, and seized her by the gown, and wanted tohold her fast, saying, "That is my house, no one can go in there if Ichoose not to allow it." But the girl was silent, got away from her,and went straight into the room.
Now there lay on the table an enormous quantity of rings, whichgleamed and glittered before her eyes.  She turned them over andlooked for the plain one, but could not find it.  While she wasseeking, she saw the old woman and how she was stealing away, andwanting to go off with a bird-cage which she had in her hand.  So shewent after her and took the cage out of her hand, and when she raisedit up and looked into it, a bird was inside which had the plain ringin its bill.
Then she took the ring, and ran quite joyously home with it, andthought the little white dove would come and get the ring, but it didnot.  Then she leant against a tree, determined to wait for the dove.As she thus stood, it seemed just as if the tree was soft and pliant,and was letting its branches down.  And suddenly the branches twinedaround her, and were two arms, and when she looked around, the treewas a handsome man, who embraced and kissed her heartily, and said,"You have delivered me from the power of the old woman, who is awicked witch.  She had changed me into a tree, and every day for twohours I was a white dove, and so long as she possessed the ring Icould not regain my human form." Then his servants and his horses,who had likewise been changed into trees, were freed from theenchanter also, and stood beside him.  And he led them forth to hiskingdom, for he was a king's son, and they married, and livedhappily.There was once a man who had three sons, and nothing else in theworld but the house in which he lived.  Now each of the sons wishedto have the house after his father's death, but the father loved themall alike, and did not know what to do, he did not wish to sell thehouse, because it had belonged to his forefathers, else he might havedivided the money amongst them. At last he conceived a plan, and hesaid to his sons, "Go into the world, and try each of you to learn atrade, and, when you all come back, he who makes the best masterpieceshall have the house."
The sons were well content with this, and the eldest determined to bea blacksmith, the second a barber, and the third a fencing-master.They fixed a time when they should all come home again, and then eachwent his way.
It chanced that they all found skillful masters, who taught themtheir trades well.  The blacksmith had to shoe the king's horses, andhe thought to himself, "The house is mine, without doubt." The barbershaved only distinguished people, and he too already looked upon thehouse as his own.  The fencing-master suffered many a blow, but hegrit his teeth, and let nothing vex him, for, said he to himself, "Ifyou are afraid of a blow, you'll never win the house."
When the appointed time had gone by, the three brothers came backhome to their father, but they did not know how to find the bestopportunity for showing their skill, so they sat down and consultedtogether.  As they were sitting thus, all at once a hare came runningacross the field.  Ah, ha, just in time, said the barber.  So he tookhis basin and soap, and lathered away until the hare drew near, thenhe soaped and shaved off the hare's whiskers whilst he was running atthe top of his speed, and did not even cut his skin or injure a hairon his body. "Well done," said the old man. "If the others do notmake a great effort, the house is yours."
Soon after, up came a nobleman in his coach, dashing along at fullspeed.  "Now you shall see what I can do, father," said theblacksmith.  So away he ran after the coach, took all four shoes offthe feet of one of the horses whilst he was galloping, and put onfour new shoes without stopping him.  "You are a fine fellow, and asclever as your brother," said his father.  "I do not know to which Iought to give the house."
Then the third son said, "Father, let me have my turn, if youplease," and, as it was beginning to rain, he drew his sword, andflourished it backwards and forwards above his head so fast that nota drop fell upon him.  It rained still harder and harder, till atlast it came down in torrents, but he only flourished his swordfaster and faster, and remained as dry as if he were sitting in ahouse.  When his father saw this he was amazed, and said, "This isthe masterpiece, the house is yours."
His brothers were satisfied with this, as was agreed beforehand, and,as they loved one another very much, they all three stayed togetherin the house, followed their trades, and, as they had learnt them sowell and were so clever, they earned a great deal of money.  Thusthey lived together happily until they grew old, and at last, whenone of them fell sick and died, the two others grieved so sorelyabout it that they also fell ill, and soon after died.  And becausethey had been so clever, and had loved one another so much, they wereall laid in the same grave.There was a great war, and the king had many soldiers, but gave themsmall pay, so small that they could not live upon it, so three ofthem agreed among themselves to desert.  One of them said to theothers, "If we are caught we shall be hanged on the gallows, howshall we manage it?" Another said, "Look at that great cornfield, ifwe were to hide ourselves there, no one could find us, the troops arenot allowed to enter it, and to-morrow they are to march away." Theycrept into the corn, only the troops did not march away, but remainedlying all round about it.  They stayed in the corn for two days andtwo nights, and were so hungry that they all but died, but if theyhad come out, their death would have been certain.  Then said they,"What is the use of our deserting if we have to perish miserablyhere?"
But now a fiery dragon came flying through the air, and it came downto them, and asked why they had concealed themselves there.  Theyanswered, "We are three soldiers who have deserted because the paywas so bad, and now we shall have to die of hunger if we stay here,or to dangle on the gallows if we go out." "If you will serve me forseven years," said the dragon, "I will convey you through the army sothat no one shall seize you." "We have no choice and are compelled toaccept," they replied.  Then the dragon caught hold of them with hisclaws, and carried them away through the air over the army, and putthem down again on the earth far from it, but the dragon was no otherthan the devil.  He gave them a small whip and said, "Whip with itand crack it, and then as much gold will spring up round about as youcan wish for, then you can live like great lords, keep horses, anddrive your carriages, but when the seven years have come to an end,you are my property."
Then he put before them a book which they were all three forced tosign.  "But first I will ask you a riddle," said he, "and if you canguess it, you shall be free, and released from my power." Then thedragon flew away from them, and they went away with their whip, hadgold in plenty, ordered themselves rich apparel, and traveled aboutthe world.  Wherever they were they lived in pleasure andmagnificence, rode on horseback, drove in carriages, ate and drank,but did nothing wicked.  The time slipped quickly by, and when theseven years were coming to an end, two of them were terribly anxiousand alarmed, but the third took the affair easily, and said,"Brothers, fear nothing, I still have my wits about me, I shall guessthe riddle." They went out into the open country and sat down, andthe two pulled sorrowful faces.  Then an aged woman came up to themwho inquired why they were so sad. "Well," said they, "what has thatgot to do with you?  After all, you cannot help us." "Who knows?"said she. "Just confide your trouble to me." So they told her thatthey had been the devil's servants for nearly seven years, and thathe had provided them with gold as though it were hay, but that theyhad sold themselves to him, and were forfeited to him, if at the endof the seven years they could not guess a riddle.
The old woman said, "If you are to be saved, one of you must go intothe forest, there he will come to a fallen rock which looks like alittle house, he must enter that, and then he will obtain help." Thetwo melancholy ones thought to themselves, "That will still not saveus," and stayed where they were, but the third, the merry one, got upand walked on in the forest until he found the rockhouse.  In thelittle house a very aged woman was sitting, who was the devil'sgrandmother, and asked the soldier where he came from, and what hewanted there.  He told her everything that had happened, and as hepleased her well, she had pity on him, and said she would help him.She lifted up a great stone which lay above a cellar, and said,"Conceal yourself there, you can hear everything that is said here,only sit still, and do not stir.  When the dragon comes, I willquestion him about the riddle, he tells everything to me, so listencarefully to his answer."
At twelve o'clock at night, the dragon came flying thither, and askedfor his dinner.  The grandmother laid the table, and served up foodand drink, so that he was pleased, and they ate and drank together.In the course of conversation, she asked him what kind of a day hehad had, and how many souls he had got.  "Nothing went very wellto-day," he answered, "but I have laid hold of three soldiers, I havethem safe." "Indeed? Three soldiers, they're clever, they may escapeyou yet." The devil said mockingly, "They are mine.  I will set thema riddle, which they will never be able to guess." "What riddle isthat?" she inquired. "I will tell you, in the great north sea lies adead dogfish, that shall be your roast meat, and the rib of a whaleshall be your silver spoon, and a hollow old horse's hoof shall beyour wineglass."
When the devil had gone to bed, the old grandmother raised up thestone, and let out the soldier.  "Did you give heed to everything?""Yes," said he, "I know enough, and will save myself." Then he had togo back another way, through the window, secretly and with all speedto his companions.  He told them how the devil had been outwitted bythe old grandmother, and how he had learned the answer to the riddlefrom him.  Then they were all delighted, and of good cheer, and tookthe whip and whipped so much gold for themselves that it ran all overthe ground.
When the seven years had fully gone by, the devil came with the book,showed the signatures, and said, "I will take you with me to hell.There you shall have a meal.  If you can guess what kind of roastmeat you will have to eat, you shall be free and released from yourbargain, and may keep the whip as well." Then the first soldier beganand said, "In the great north sea lies a dead dogfish, that no doubtis the roast meat."
The devil was angry, and began to mutter, "Hm. Hm. Hm." And asked thesecond, "But what will your spoon be?" "The rib of a whale, that isto be our silver spoon." The devil made a wry face, again growled,"Hm. Hm. Hm." He said to the third, "And do you also know what yourwineglass is to be?" "An old horse's hoof is to be our wineglass."Then the devil flew away with a loud cry, and had no more power overthem, but the three kept the whip, whipped as much money forthemselves with it as they wanted, and lived happily to their end.
Once upon a time lived a man and a woman who so long as they wererich had no children, but when they were poor they got a little boy.They could find no godfather for him, so the man said he would justgo to another village to see if he could get one there.  On his wayhe met a poor man, who asked him where he was going.  He said he wasgoing to see if he could get a godfather, because he was so poor thatno one would stand as godfather for him.  "Oh," said the poor man,"you are poor, and I am poor.  I will be godfather for you, but I amso badly off I can give the child nothing.  Go home and tell themidwife that she is to come to the church with the child." When theyall got to the church together, the beggar was already there, and hegave the child the name of Ferdinand the Faithful.
When he was going out of the church, the beggar said, "Now go home, Ican give you nothing, and you likewise ought to give me nothing." Buthe gave a key to the midwife, and told her when she got home she wasto give it to the father, who was to take care of it until the childwas fourteen years old, and then he was to go on the heath wherethere was a castle which the key would fit, and that all which wastherein should belong to him.
Now when the child was seven years old and had grown very big, heonce went to play with some other boys, and each of them boasted thathe had got more from his godfather than the other, but the childcould say nothing, and was vexed, and went home and said to hisfather, "Did I get nothing at all, then, from my godfather?" "Oh,yes," said the father, "you have a key.  If there is a castlestanding on the heath, just go to it and open it." Then the boy wentthither, but no castle was to be seen, or heard of.
After seven years more, when he was fourteen years old, he again wentthither, and there stood the castle.  When he had opened it, therewas nothing within but a horse, - a white one.  Then the boy was sofull of joy because he had a horse, that he mounted on it andgalloped back to his father.  "Now I have a white horse, and I willtravel," said he.
So he set out, and as he was on his way, a pen was lying on the road.At first he thought he would pick it up, but then again he thought tohimself, "You should leave it lying there, you will easily find a penwhere you are going, if you have need of one." As he was thus ridingaway, a voice called after him, "Ferdinand the Faithful, take it withyou." He looked around, but saw no one, so he went back again andpicked it up.
When he had ridden a little way farther, he passed by a lake, and afish was lying on the bank, gasping and panting for breath, so hesaid, "Wait, my dear fish, I will help you to get into the water,"and he took hold of it by the tail, and threw it into the lake.  Thenthe fish put its head out of the water and said, "As you have helpedme out of the mud I will give you a flute.  When you are in any need,play on it, and then I will help you, and if ever you let anythingfall in the water, just play and I will reach it out to you."
Then he rode away, and there came to him a man who asked him where hewas going.  "Oh, to the next place." "What is your name?" "Ferdinandthe Faithful." "So, then we have almost the same name, I am calledFerdinand the Unfaithful." And they both set out to the inn in thenearest place.
Now it was unfortunate that Ferdinand the Unfaithful knew everythingthat the other had ever thought and everything he was about to do. Heknew it by means of all kinds of wicked arts.  There was in the innan honest girl, who had a bright face and behaved very prettily. Shefell in love with Ferdinand the Faithful because he was a handsomeman, and she asked him whither he was going.  "Oh, I am justtraveling round about," said he.  Then she said he ought to staythere, for the king of that country wanted an attendant or anoutrider, and he ought to enter his service.  He answered he couldnot very well go to any one like that and offer himself.  Then saidthe maiden, "Oh, but I will soon do that for you." And so she wentstraight to the king, and told him that she knew of an excellentservant for him.  He was well pleased with that, and had Ferdinandthe Faithful brought to him, and wanted to make him his servant.  He,however, liked better to be an outrider, for where his horse was,there he also wanted to be, so the king made him an outrider.
When Ferdinand the Unfaithful learnt that, he said to the girl,"What? Do you help him and not me?" "Oh," said the girl, "I will helpyou too." She thought, I must keep friends with that man, for he isnot to be trusted.  She went to the king, and offered him as aservant, and the king was willing.
Now when the king met his lords in the morning, he always lamentedand said, "Oh, if I only had my love with me." Ferdinand theUnfaithful, however, was always hostile to Ferdinand the Faithful. Soonce, when the king was complaining thus, he said, "You have theoutrider, send him away to get her, and if he does not do it, hishead must be struck off." Then the king sent for Ferdinand theFaithful, and told him that there was, in this place or in thatplace, a girl he loved, and that he was to bring her to him, and ifhe did not do it he should die.  Ferdinand the Faithful went into thestable to his white horse, and complained and lamented, "Oh, what anunhappy man am I." Then someone behind him cried, "Ferdinand theFaithful, why do you weep?" He looked round but saw no one, and wenton lamenting.  "Oh, my dear little white horse, now must I leave you,now I must die." Then someone cried once more, "Ferdinand theFaithful, why do you weep?" Then for the first time he was aware thatit was his little white horse who was putting that question.  "Do youspeak, my little white horse?  Can you do that?" And again, he said,"I am to go to this place and to that, and am to bring the bride.Can you tell me how I am to set about it?" Then answered the whitehorse, "Go to the king, and say if he will give you what you musthave, you will get her for him.  If he will give you a ship full ofmeat, and a ship full of bread, it will succeed.  Great giants dwellon the lake, and if you take no meat with you for them, they willtear you to pieces, and there are the large birds which would pluckthe eyes out of your head if you had no bread for them.  Then theking made all the butchers in the land kill, and all the bakers bake,that the ships might be filled."
When they were full, the little white horse said to Ferdinand theFaithful, "Now mount me, and go with me into the ship, and then whenthe giants come, say - peace, peace, my dear little giants,  I havehad thought of ye,  something I have brought for ye.  And when thebirds come, you shall again say - peace, peace, my dear little birds,I have had thought of ye,  something I have brought for ye.  Thenthey will do nothing to you, and when you come to the castle, thegiants will help you.  Then go up to the castle, and take a couple ofgiants with you.  There the princess lies sleeping.  You must,however, not awaken her, but the giants must lift her up, and carryher in her bed to the ship." And now everything took place as thelittle white horse had said, and Ferdinand the Faithful gave thegiants and the birds what he had brought with him for them, and thatmade the giants willing, and they carried the princess in her bed tothe king.  And when she came to the king, she said she could notlive, she must have her writings, they had been left in her castle.
Then by the instigation of Ferdinand the Unfaithful, Ferdinand theFaithful was called, and the king told him he must fetch the writingsfrom the castle, or he should die.  Then he went once more into thestable, and bemoaned himself and said, "Oh, my dear little whitehorse, now I am to go away again, how am I to do it?" Then the littlewhite horse said he was just to load the ships full again.  So ithappened again as it had happened before, and the giants and thebirds were satisfied, and made gentle by the meat.  When they came tothe castle, the white horse told Ferdinand the Faithful that he mustgo in, and that on the table in the princess's bed-room lay thewritings.  And Ferdinand the Faithful went in, and fetched them. Whenthey were on the lake, he let his pen fall into the water.  Then saidthe white horse, "Now I cannot help you at all." But he rememberedhis flute, and began to play on it, and the fish came with the pen inits mouth, and gave it to him.  So he took the writings to thecastle, where the wedding was celebrated.
The queen, however, did not love the king because he had no nose, butshe would have much liked to love Ferdinand the Faithful.  Once,therefore, when all the lords of the court were together, the queensaid she could do feats of magic, that she could cut off anyone'shead and put it on again, and that one of them ought just to try it.But none of them would be the first, so Ferdinand the Faithful, againat the instigation of Ferdinand the Unfaithful, undertook it and shehewed off his head, and put it on again for him, and it healedtogether directly, so that it looked as if he had a red thread roundhis throat.  Then the king said to her, "My child, and where have youlearnt that?" "Oh," she said, "I understand the art.  Shall I justtry it on you also." "Oh, yes," said he.  So she cut off his head,but did not put it on again, and pretended that she could not get iton, and that it would not stay.  Then the king was buried, but shemarried Ferdinand the Faithful.
He, however, always rode on his white horse, and once when he wasseated on it, it told him that he was to go on to the heath which heknew, and gallop three times round it.  And when he had done that,the white horse stood up on its hind legs, and was changed into aking's son.
In the days when wishing was still of some use, a king's son wasbewitched by an old witch, and shut up in an iron stove in a forest.There he passed many years, and no one could rescue him.  Then aking's daughter came into the forest, who had lost herself, and couldnot find her father's kingdom again.  After she had wandered aboutfor nine days, she at length came to the iron stove.
Then a voice came forth from it, and asked her, "Whence do you come,and whither are you going?" She answered, "I have lost my father'skingdom, and cannot get home again." Then a voice inside the ironstove said, "I will help you to get home again, and that indeed mostswiftly, if you will promise to do what I desire of you.  I am theson of a far greater king than your father, and I will marry you."
Then was she afraid, and thought, "Good heavens.  What can I do withan iron stove?" But as she much wished to get home to her father, shepromised to do as he desired.  But he said, "You shall return here,and bring a knife with you, and scrape a hole in the iron." Then hegave her a companion who walked near her, but did not speak, and intwo hours he took her home.  There was great joy in the castle whenthe king's daughter came home, and the old king fell on her neck andkissed her.  She, however, was sorely troubled, and said, "Dearfather, what I have suffered.  I should never have got home againfrom the great wild forest, if I had not come to an iron stove, but Ihave been forced to give my word that I will go back to it, set itfree, and marry it."
Then the old king was so terrified that he all but fainted, for hehad but this one daughter.  They therefore resolved they would send,in her place, the miller's daughter, who was very beautiful.  Theytook her there, gave her a knife, and said she was to scrape at theiron stove.  So she scraped at it for four-and-twenty hours, butcould not bring off the least morsel of it.  When the day dawned, avoice in the stove said, "It seems to me it is day outside." Then sheanswered, "It seems so to me too, I fancy I hear the noise of myfather's mill." "So you are a miller's daughter.  Then go your way atonce, and let the king's daughter come here."
Then she went away at once, and told the old king that the manoutside there would have none of her - he wanted the king's daughter.Then the old king grew frightened, and the daughter wept.  But therewas a swine-herd's daughter, who was even prettier than the miller'sdaughter, and they determined to give her a piece of gold to go tothe iron stove instead of the king's daughter.  So she was takenthither and she also had to scrape for four-and-twenty hours.  She,however, was no better at it.  When the day broke, a voice inside thestove cried, "It seems to me it is day outside." Then answered she,"So it seems to me also, I fancy I hear my father's horn blowing.""Then you are a swineherd's daughter.  Go away at once, and tell theking's daughter to come, and tell her all must be done as promised,and if she does not come, everything in the kingdom shall be ruinedand destroyed, and not one stone be left standing on another."
When the king's daughter heard that she began to weep, but now therewas nothing for it but to keep her promise.  So she took leave of herfather, put a knife in her pocket, and went forth to the iron stovein the forest.  When she got there, she began to scrape, and the irongave way, and when two hours were over, she had already scraped asmall hole. Then she peeped in, and saw a youth so handsome, and sobrilliant with gold and with precious jewels, that her very soul wasdelighted.  So she went on scraping, and made the hole so large thathe was able to get out.
Then said he, "You are mine, and I am yours, you are my bride, andhave released me." He wanted to take her away with him to hiskingdom, but she entreated him to let her go once again to herfather, and the king's son allowed her to do so, but she was not tosay more to her father than three words, and then she was to comeback again. So she went home, but she spoke more than three words,and instantly the iron stove disappeared, and was taken far away overglass mountains and piercing swords, but the king's son was set free,and no longer shut up in it.  After this she bade good-bye to herfather, took some money with her, but not much, and went back to thegreat forest, and looked for the iron stove, but it was nowhere to befound.
For nine days she sought it, and then her hunger grew so great thatshe did not know what to do, for she had nothing to live on.  When itwas evening, she seated herself in a small tree, and made up her mindto spend the night there, as she was afraid of wild beasts.  Whenmidnight drew near she saw in the distance a small light, andthought, ah, there I should be saved.  She got down from the tree,and went towards the light, but on the way she prayed.  Then she cameto a little old house, and much grass had grown all about it, and asmall heap of wood lay in front of it.  She thought, "Ah, whitherhave I come?" and peeped in through the window, but she saw nothinginside but toads, big and little, except a table covered with wineand roast meat, and the plates and glasses were of silver.  Then shetook courage, and knocked at the door, and immediately the fat toadcried,	"Little green waiting-maid,	Waiting-maid with the limping leg,	Little dog of the limping leg,	Hop hither and thither,	And quickly see who is without."
And a small toad came walking by and opened the door to her. When sheentered, they all bade her welcome, and she was forced to sit down.They asked, "Where have you come from, and whither are you going?"Then she related all that had befallen her, and how because she hadtransgressed the order which had been given her not to say more thanthree words, the stove, and the king's son also, had disappeared, andnow she was about to seek him over the hill and dale until she foundhim.  Then the old fat one said,	"Little green waiting-maid,	Waiting-maid with the limping leg,	Little dog of the limping leg,	Hop hither and thither,	And bring me the great box."
Then the little one went and brought the box.  After this they gaveher meat and drink, and took her to a well-made bed, which felt likesilk and velvet, and she laid herself therein, in God's name, andslept.  When morning came she arose, and the old toad gave her threeneedles out of the great box which she was to take with her, theywould be needed by her, for she had to cross a high glass mountain,and go over three piercing swords and a great lake. If she did allthis she would get her lover back again.
Then she gave her three things, which she was to take the greatestcare of, namely, three large needles, a plough-wheel, and three nuts.With these she traveled onwards, and when she came to the glassmountain which was so slippery, she stuck the three needles firstbehind her feet and then before them, and so got over it, and whenshe was over it, she hid them in a place which she marked carefully.After this she came to the three piercing swords, and then she seatedherslef on her plough-wheel, and rolled over them.  At last shearrived in front of a great lake, and when she had crossed it, shecame to a large and beautiful castle.  She went and asked for aplace, she was a poor girl, she said, and would like to be hired.She knew, however, that the king's son whom she had released from theiron stove in the great forest was in the castle.  Then she was takenas a scullery-maid at low wages.  But already the king's son hadanother maiden by his side whom he wanted to marry, for he thoughtthat she had long been dead.
In the evening, when she had washed up and was done, she felt in herpocket and found the three nuts which the old toad had given her.She cracked one with her teeth, and was going to eat the kernel whenlo and behold there was a stately royal garment in it.  But when thebride heard of this she came and asked for the dress, and wanted tobuy it, and said, "It is not a dress for a servant-girl." "No," shesaid, she would not sell it, but if the bride would grant her onething she should have it, and that was permission to sleep one nightin her bridegroom's chamber.  The bride gave her permission becausethe dress was so pretty, and she had never had one like it.
When it was evening she said to her bridegroom, "That silly girl willsleep in your room." "If you are willing, so am I," said he.  She,however, gave him a glass of wine in which she had poured asleeping-draught.  So the bridegroom and the scullery-maid went tosleep in the room, and he slept so soundly that she could not wakenhim. She wept the whole night and cried, "I set you free when youwere in an iron stove in the wild forest, I sought you, and walkedover a glass mountain, and three sharp swords, and a great lakebefore I found you, and yet you will not hear me." The servants satby the chamber-door, and heard how she thus wept the whole nightthrough, and in the morning they told it to their lord.
And the next evening when she had washed up, she opened the secondnut, and a far more beautiful dress was within it, and when the bridebeheld it, she wished to buy that also. But the girl would not takemoney, and begged that she might once again sleep in the bridegroom'schamber.  The bride, however, gave him a sleeping-draught, and heslept so soundly that he could hear nothing.  But the scullery-maidwept the whole night long, and cried, "I set you free when you werein an iron stove in the wild forest, I sought you, and walked over aglass mountain, and over three sharp swords and a great lake before Ifound you, and yet you will not hear me." The servants sat by thechamber-door and heard her weeping the whole night through, and inthe morning informed their lord of it.
And on the third evening, when she had washed up, she opened thethird nut, and within it was a still more beautiful dress which wasstiff with pure gold.  When the bride saw that she wanted to have it,but the maiden only gave it up on condition that she might for thethird time sleep in the bridegroom's apartment.  The king's son,however, was on his guard, and threw the sleeping-draught away.  Nowwhen she began to weep and to cry, "Dearest love, I set you free whenyou were in the iron stove in the terrible wild forest" - the king'sson leapt up and said, "You are the true one, you are mine, and I amyours."
Thereupon, while it was still night, he got into a carriage with her,and they took away the false bride's clothes so that she could notget up.  When they came to the great lake, they sailed across it, andwhen they reached the three sharp-cutting swords they seatedthemselves on the plough-wheel, and when they got to the glassmountain they thrust the three needles in it, and so at length theygot to the little old house, but when they went inside, it was agreat castle, and the toads were all disenchanted, and were king'schildren, and full of happiness.  Then the wedding was celebrated,and the king's son and the princess remained in the castle, which wasmuch larger than the castle of their fathers.  But as the old kinggrieved at being left alone, they fetched him away, and brought himto live with them, and they had two kingdoms, and lived in happywedlock.	A mouse did run,	This story is done.There was once a poor man who had four sons, and when they were grownup, he said to them, "My dear children, you must now go out into theworld, for I have nothing to give you, so set out, go abroad andlearn a trade, and see how you can make your way." So the fourbrothers took their sticks, bade their father farewell, and wentthrough the town-gate together.  When they had traveled about forsome time, they came to a crossroads which branched off in fourdifferent directions.  Then said the eldest, "Here we must separate,but on this day four years hence, we will meet each other again atthis spot, and in the meantime we will seek our fortunes."
Then each of them went his way, and the eldest met a man who askedhim where he was going, and what he was intending to do. "I want tolearn a trade," he replied.  Then the other said, "Come with me," andbe a thief.  "No," he answered, "that is no longer regarded as areputable trade, and the end of it is that one has to swing on thegallows." "Oh," said the man, "you need not be afraid of the gallows,I will only teach you to get such things as no other man could everlay hold of, and no one will ever detect you." So he allowed himselfto be talked into it, and while with the man became an accomplishedthief, and so dexterous that nothing was safe from him, if he oncedesired to have it.
The second brother met a man who put the same question to him - whathe wanted to learn in the world.  "I don't know yet," he replied."Then come with me, and be an astronomer, there is nothing betterthan that, for nothing is hid from you." He liked the idea, andbecame such a skillful astronomer that when he had learnt everything,and was about to travel onwards, his master gave him a telescope andsaid to him, "With that you can see whatsoever takes place either onearth or in heaven, and nothing can remain concealed from you."
A huntsman took the third brother into training, and gave him suchexcellent instruction in everything which related to huntsmanshipthat he became an experienced hunter.  When he went away, his mastergave him a gun and said, "It will never fail you, whatsoever you aimat, you are certain to hit." The youngest brother also met a man whospoke to him, and inquired what his intentions were.  "Would you notlike to be a tailor?" said he.  "Not that I know of," said the youth,"sitting doubled up from morning till night, driving the needle andthe goose backwards and forwards, is not to my taste." "Oh, but youare speaking in ignorance," answered the man.  "With me you wouldlearn a very different kind of tailoring, which is respectable andproper, and for the most part very honorable." So he let himself bepersuaded, and went with the man, and learnt his art from the verybeginning.  When they parted, the man gave the youth a needle, andsaid, "With this you can sew together whatever is given you, whetherit is as soft as an egg or as hard as steel, and it will all becomeone piece of stuff, so that no seam will be visible."
When the appointed four years were over, the four brothers arrived atthe same time at the cross-roads, embraced and kissed each other, andreturned home to their father.  "So now," said he, quite delighted,"the wind has blown you back again to me." They told him of all thathad happened to them, and that each had learnt his own trade.  Nowthey were sitting just in front of the house under a large tree, andthe father said, "I will put you all to the test, and see what youcan do." Then he looked up and said to his second son, "Between twobranches up at the top of this tree, there is a chaffinch's nest,tell me how many eggs there are in it." The astronomer took hisglass, looked up and said, "There are five." Then the father said tothe eldest, "Fetch the eggs down without disturbing the bird which issitting hatching them." The skillful thief climbed up, and took thefive eggs from beneath the bird, which never observed what he wasdoing, and remained quietly sitting where she was, and brought themdown to his father.
The father took them, and put one of them on each corner of thetable, and the fifth in the middle, and said to the huntsman, "Withone shot you shall shoot me the five eggs in two, through themiddle." The huntsman aimed, and shot the eggs, all five as thefather had desired, and that at one shot.  He certainly must have hadsome of the powder for shooting round corners.  "Now it's your turn,"said the father to the fourth son, "You shall sew the eggs togetheragain, and the young birds that are inside them as well, and you mustdo it so that they are not hurt by the shot." The tailor brought hisneedle, and sewed them as his father wished.  When he had done thisthe thief had to climb up the tree again, and carry them to the nest,and put them back again under the bird without her being aware of it.The bird sat her full time, and after a few days the young ones creptout, and they had a red line round their necks where they had beensewn together by the tailor.
"Well," said the old man to his sons, "you really ought to be praisedto the skies, you have used your time well, and learnt somethinggood.  I can't say which of you deserves the most praise. That willbe proved if you have but an early opportunity of using yourtalents." Not long after this, there was a great uproar in thecountry, for the king's daughter was carried off by a dragon. Theking was full of trouble about it, both by day an night, and causedit to be proclaimed that whosoever brought her back should have herto wife.
The four brothers said to each other, "This would be a fineopportunity for us to show what we can do." And resolved to go forthtogether and liberate the king's daughter. "I will soon know whereshe is," said the astronomer, and looked through his telescope andsaid, "I see her already, she is far away from here on a rock in thesea, and the dragon is beside her watching her."
Then he went to the king, and asked for a ship for himself and hisbrothers, and sailed with them over the sea until they came to therock.  There the king's daughter was sitting, and the dragon waslying asleep on her lap.  The huntsman said, "I dare not fire, Ishould kill the beautiful maiden at the same time." "Then I will trymy art," said the thief, and he crept thither and stole her away fromunder the dragon, so quietly and dexterously, that the monster nevernoticed it, but went on snoring.
Full of joy, they hurried off with her on board ship, and steered outinto the open sea, but the dragon, who when he awoke had found noprincess there, followed them, and came snorting angrily through theair.  Just as he was circling above the ship, and about to descend onit, the huntsman shouldered his gun, and shot him to the heart.  Themonster fell down dead, but was so large and powerful that his fallshattered the whole ship.  Fortunately, however, they laid hold of acouple of planks, and swam about the wide sea.
Then again they were in great peril, but the tailor, who was notidle, took his wondrous needle, and with a few stitches sewed theplanks together and they seated themselves upon them, and collectedtogether all the fragments of the vessel.  Then he sewed these soskillfully together, that in a very short time the ship was once moreseaworthy, and they could go home again in safety.
When the king once more saw his daughter, there were greatrejoicings.  He said to the four brothers, one of you shall have herto wife, but which of you it is to be you must settle amongyourselves.  Then a heated argument arose among them, for each ofthem preferred his own claim.  The astronomer said, "If I had notseen the princess, all your arts would have been useless, so she ismine." The thief said, "What would have been the use of your seeing,if I had not got her away from the dragon.  So she is mine." Thehuntsman said, "You and the princess, and all of you, would have beentorn to pieces by the dragon if my ball had not hit him, so she ismine." The tailor said, "And if I, by my art, had not sewn the shiptogether again, you would all of you have been miserably drowned, soshe is mine."
Then the king pronounced his verdict, each of you has an equal right,and as all of you cannot have the maiden, none of you shall have her,but I will give to each of you, as a reward, half a kingdom.  Thebrothers were pleased with this decision, and said, it is better thusthan that we should be at variance with each other.  Then each ofthem received half a kingdom, and they lived with their father in thegreatest happiness as long as it pleased God.There was once a woman who had three daughters, the eldest of whomwas called One-Eye, because she had only one eye in the middle of herforehead, and the second, Two-Eyes, because she had two eyes likeother folks, and the youngest, Three-Eyes, because she had threeeyes, and her third eye was also in the center of her forehead.However, as Two-Eyes saw just as other human beings did, her sistersand her mother could not endure her.  They said to her, "You, withyour two eyes, are no better than the common people, you do notbelong to us." They pushed her about, and threw old clothes to her,and gave her nothing to eat but what they left, and did everythingthat they could to make her unhappy.
It came to pass that Two-Eyes had to go out into the fields and tendthe goat, but she was still quite hungry, because her sisters hadgiven her so little to eat.  So she sat down on a ridge and began toweep, and so bitterly that two streams ran down from her eyes.  Andonce when she looked up in her grief, a woman was standing besideher, who said, "Why are you weeping, little Two-Eyes?" Two-Eyesanswered, "Have I not reason to weep, when I have two eyes like otherpeople, and my sisters and mother hate me for it, and push me fromone corner to another, throw old clothes to me, and give me nothingto eat but the scraps they leave.  Today they have given me so littlethat I am still quite hungry." Then the wise woman said, "Wipe awayyour tears, Two-Eyes, and I will tell you something to stop your eversuffering from hunger again.  Just say to your goat -	 `Bleat, my little goat, bleat,	 Cover the table with something to eat,'and then a clean well-spread little table will stand before you withthe most delicious food upon it of which you may eat as much as youare inclined for, and when you have had enough, and have no more needof the little table, just say,	 `Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,	 and take the table quite away,'and then it will vanish again from your sight." Hereupon the wisewoman departed.  But Two-Eyes thought, "I must instantly make atrial, and see if what she said is true, for I am far too hungry,"and she said -	 "Bleat, my little goat, bleat,	 Cover the table with something to eat,"and scarcely had she spoken the words than a little table, coveredwith a white cloth, was standing there, and on it was a plate with aknife and fork, and a silver spoon, and the most delicious food wasthere also, warm and smoking as if it had just come out of thekitchen.  Then Two-Eyes said the shortest prayer she knew, "Lord God,be our guest forever, amen," and helped herself to some food, andenjoyed it.  And when she was satisfied, she said, as the wise womanhad taught her -	 "Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,	 And take the table quite away,"and immediately the little table and everything on it was gone again.That is a delightful way of keeping house, thought Two-Eyes, and wasquite glad and happy.
In the evening, when she went home with her goat, she found a smallearthenware dish with some food, which her sisters had set ready forher, but she did not touch it.  Next day she again went out with hergoat, and left the few bits of broken bread which had been handed toher, lying untouched.  The first and second time that she did this,her sisters did not notice it at all, but as it happened every time,they did observe it, and said, "There is something wrong aboutTwo-Eyes, she always leaves her food untasted, and she used to eat upeverything that was given her, she must have discovered other ways ofgetting food." In order that they might learn the truth, theyresolved to send One-Eye with Two-Eyes when she went to drive hergoat to the pasture, to observe what Two-Eyes did when she was there,and whether anyone brought her anything to eat and drink.
So when Two-Eyes set out the next time, One-Eye went to her and said,"I will go with you to the pasture, and see that the goat is welltaken care of, and driven where there is food." But Two-Eyes knewwhat was in One-Eye's mind, and drove the goat into high grass andsaid, "Come, One-Eye, we will sit down, and I will sing something toyou." One-Eye sat down and was tired with the unaccustomed walk andthe heat of the sun, and Two-Eyes sang constantly -	 "One-eye, are you waking?	 One-eye, are you sleeping?"Until One-Eye shut her one eye, and fell asleep, and as soon asTwo-Eyes saw that One-Eye was fast asleep, and could discovernothing, she said,	 "Bleat, my little goat, bleat,	 Cover the table with something to eat,"and seated herself at her table, and ate and drank until she wassatisfied, and then she again cried -	 "Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,	 And take the table quite away,"and in an instant all had vanished.  Two-Eyes now awakened One-Eye,and said, "One-Eye, you want to take care of the goat, and go tosleep while you are doing it, but in the meantime the goat might runall over the world.  Come, let us go home again."
So they went home, and again Two-Eyes let her dish stand untouched,and One-Eye could not tell her mother why she would not eat it, andto excuse herself said, "I fell asleep when I was out." Next day themother said to Three-Eyes, this time you shall go and observe ifTwo-Eyes eats anything when she is out, and if anyone fetches herfood and drink, for she must eat and drink in secret.  So Three-Eyeswent to Two-Eyes, and said, "I will go with you and see if the goatis taken proper care of, and driven where there is food." ButTwo-Eyes knew what was in Three-Eyes' mind, and drove the goat intohigh grass and said, "We will sit down, and I will sing something toyou, Three-Eyes." Three-Eyes sat down and was tired with the walk andwith the heat of the sun, and Two-Eyes began the same song as before,and sang -	 "Three-Eyes, are you waking?"
But then, instead of singing -	 "Three-Eyes, are you sleeping?"
As she ought to have done, she thoughtlessly sang -	 "Two-Eyes, are you sleeping?"
And sang all the time -	 "Three-Eyes, are you waking?	 Two-Eyes, are you sleeping?"
Then two of the eyes which Three-Eyes had, shut and fell asleep, butthe third, as it had not been named in the song, did not sleep.  Itis true that three-eyes shut it, but only in her cunning, to pretendit was asleep too, but it blinked, and could see everything verywell.  And when two-eyes thought that three-eyes was fast asleep, sheused her little charm -	 "Bleat, my little goat, bleat,	 Cover the table with something to eat,"and ate and drank as much as her heart desired, and then ordered thetable to go away again,	 "Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,	 And take the table quite away,"and Three-Eyes had seen everything.  Then Two-Eyes came to her, wakedher and said, "Have you been asleep, Three-Eyes?  You keep watch verywell.  Come, we will go home." And when they got home, Two-Eyes againdid not eat, and Three-Eyes said to the mother, "Now, I know why thathaughty thing there does not eat. When she is out, she says to thegoat -	 `Bleat, my little goat, bleat,	 Cover the table with something to eat,'and then a little table appears before her covered with the best offood, much better than any we have here, and when she has eaten allshe wants, she says -	 `Bleat, bleat, my little goat, I pray,	 And take the table quite away,'and all disappears.  I watched everything closely.  She put two of myeyes to sleep by means of a charm, but luckily the one in my foreheadkept awake."
Then the envious mother cried, "Do you want to fare better than wedo?  The desire shall pass from you," and she fetched a butcher'sknife, and thrust it into the heart of the goat, which fell downdead. When Two-Eyes saw that, she went out full of sadness, seatedherself on the ridge of grass at the edge of the field, and weptbitter tears.  Suddenly the wise woman once more stood by her side,and said, "Two-Eyes, why are you weeping?" "Have I not reason toweep?" she answered.  "The goat which covered the table for me everyday when I spoke your charm, has been killed by my mother, and now Ishall again have to bear hunger and want." The wise woman said,"Two-Eyes, I will give you a piece of good advice, ask your sistersto give you the entrails of the slaughtered goat, and bury them inthe ground in front of the house, and your fortune will be made."Then she vanished, and Two-Eyes went home and said to her sisters,"Dear sisters, do give me some part of my goat, I don't wish for whatis good, but give me the entrails." Then they laughed and said, "Ifthat's all you want, you can have it." So Two-Eyes took the entrailsand buried them quietly in the evening, in front of the house-door,as the wise woman had counseled her to do.
Next morning, when they all awoke, and went to the house-door, therestood a strangely magnificent tree with leaves of silver, and fruitof gold hanging among them, so that in all the wide world there wasnothing more beautiful or precious.  They did not know how the treecould have come there during the night, but Two-Eyes saw that it hadgrown up out of the entrails of the goat, for it was standing on theexact spot where she had buried them.  Then the mother said toOne-Eye, "Climb up, my child, and gather some of the fruit of thetree for us." One-eye climbed up, but when she was about to get holdof one of the golden apples, the branch escaped from her hands, andthat happened each time, so that she could not pluck a single apple,let her do what she might.  Then said the mother, "Three-Eyes, youclimb up, you with your three eyes can look about you better thanOne-Eye." One-Eye slipped down, and Three-Eyes climbed up.Three-Eyes was not more skillful, and might try as she would, but thegolden apples always escaped her.
At length the mother grew impatient, and climbed up herself, butcould get hold of the fruit no better than One-Eye and Three-Eyes,for she always clutched empty air.  Then said Two-Eyes, "Let me goup, perhaps I may succeed better." The sisters cried, "You indeed,with your two eyes, what can you do?" But Two-Eyes climbed up, andthe golden apples did not avoid her, but came into her hand of theirown accord, so that she could pluck them one after the other, andbrought a whole apronful down with her. The mother took them awayfrom her, and instead of treating poor Two-Eyes any better for this,she and One-Eye and Three-Eyes were only envious, because Two-Eyesalone had been able to get the fruit, and they treated her still morecruelly.
It so befell that once when they were all standing together by thetree, a young knight came up.  "Quick, Two-Eyes," cried the twosisters, "creep under this, and don't disgrace us," and with allspeed they turned an empty barrel which was standing close by thetree over poor Two-Eyes, and they swept the golden apples which shehad been gathering, under it too.  When the knight came nearer he wasa handsome lord, who stopped and admired the magnificent gold andsilver tree, and said to the two sisters, "To whom does this finetree belong?  Anyone who would bestow one branch of it on me might inreturn for it ask whatsoever he desired." Then One-Eye and Three-Eyesreplied that the tree belonged to them, and that they would give hima branch.  They both took great trouble, but they were not able to doit, for the branches and fruit both moved away from them every time.Then said the knight, "It is very strange that the tree should belongto you, and that you should not have the power to break a piece off."They again asserted that the tree was their property.
Whilst they were saying so, Two-Eyes rolled out a couple of goldenapples from under the barrel to the feet of the knight, for she wasvexed with One-Eye and Three-Eyes, for not speaking the truth.  Whenthe knight saw the apples he was astonished, and asked where theycame from.  One-Eye and Three-Eyes answered that they had anothersister, who was not allowed to show herself, for she had only twoeyes like any common person.  The knight, however, desired to seeher, and cried, "Two-Eyes, come forth." Then Two-Eyes, quitecomforted, came from beneath the barrel, and the knight was surprisedat her great beauty, and said, "You, Two-Eyes, can certainly breakoff a branch from the tree for me." "Yes," replied Two-Eyes, "that Icertainly shall be able to do, for the tree belongs to me." And sheclimbed up, and with the greatest ease broke off a branch withbeautiful silver leaves and golden fruit, and gave it to the knight.Then said the knight, "Two-Eyes, what shall I give you for it?""Alas, answered two-eyes, "I suffer from hunger and thirst, grief andwant, from early morning till late night.  If you would take me withyou, and rescue me, I should be happy." So the knight lifted Two-Eyeson to his horse, and took her home with him to his father's castle,and there he gave her beautiful clothes, and meat and drink to herheart's content, and as he loved her so much he married her, and thewedding was solemnized with great rejoicing.
When Two-Eyes was thus carried away by the handsome knight, her twosisters grudged her good fortune in downright earnest. "The wonderfultree, however, still remains with us," thought they, "and even if wecan gather no fruit from it, still every one will stand still andlook at it, and come to us and admire it.  Who knows what good thingsmay be in store for us." But next morning, the tree had vanished, andall their hopes were at an end.  And when Two-Eyes looked out of thewindow of her own room, to her great delight it was standing in frontof it, and so it had followed her.
Two-Eyes lived a long time in happiness.  Once two poor women came toher in her castle, and begged for alms.  She looked in their faces,and recognized her sisters, One-Eye, and Three-Eyes, who had falleninto such poverty that they had to wander about and beg their breadfrom door to door.  Two-Eyes, however, made them welcome, and waskind to them, and took care of them, so that they both with all theirhearts repented the evil that they had done their sister in theiryouth."Good-day, father hollenthe." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie." "May Ibe allowed to have your daughter?" "Oh, yes, if mother malchomilchcow, brother high-and-mighty, sister kasetraut, and fairkatrinelje are willing, you can have her." "Where is mother malcho,then?" "She is in the cow-house, milking the cow."
"Good-day, mother malcho." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie." "May I beallowed to have your daughter?" "Oh, yes, if father hollenthe,brother high-and-mighty, sister kasetraut, and fair katrinelje arewilling, you can have her." "Where is brother high-and-mighty, then?""He is in the room chopping some wood."
"Good-day, brother high-and-mighty." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie.""May I be allowed to have your sister?" "Oh, yes, if fatherhollenthe, mother malcho, sister kasetraut, and fair katrinelje arewilling, you can have her." "Where is sister kasetraut, then?" "Sheis in the garden cutting cabbages."
"Good-day, sister kasetraut." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie." "May Ibe allowed to have your sister?" "Oh, yes, if father hollenthe,mother malcho, brother high-and-mighty, and fair katrinelje arewilling, you may have her." "Where is fair katrinelje, then." "She isin the room counting out her farthings."
"Good day, fair katrinelje." "Many thanks, pif-paf-poltrie." "Willyou be my bride?" "Oh, yes, if father hollenthe, mother malcho,brother high-and-mighty, and sister kasetraut are willing, I amready."
"Fair katrinelje, how much dowry do you have?" "Fourteen farthings inready money, three and a half groschen owing to me, half a pound ofdried apples, a handful of pretzels, and a handful of roots.	And many other things are mine,	Have I not a dowry fine?"
"Pif-paf-poltrie, what is your trade?  Are you a tailor?" "Somethingbetter." "A shoemaker?" "Something better." "A husbandman?""Something better." "A joiner?" "Something better." "A smith?""Something better." "A miller?" "Something better." "Perhaps abroom-maker?" "Yes, that's what I am, is it not a fine trade?"There was once upon a time a king who had twelve daughters, each onemore beautiful than the other.  They all slept together in onechamber, in which their beds stood side by side, and every night whenthey were in them the king locked the door, and bolted it.  But inthe morning when he unlocked the door, he saw that their shoes wereworn out with dancing, and no one could find out how that had come topass.  Then the king caused it to be proclaimed that whosoever coulddiscover where they danced at night, should choose one of them forhis wife and be king after his death, but that whosoever came forwardand had not discovered it within three days and nights, should haveforfeited his life.
It was not long before a king's son presented himself, and offered toundertake the enterprise. He was well received, and in the eveningwas led into a room adjoining the princesses, sleeping-chamber.  Hisbed was placed there, and he was to observe where they went anddanced, and in order that they might do nothing secretly or go awayto some other place, the door of their room was left open. But theeyelids of the prince grew heavy as lead, and he fell asleep, andwhen he awoke in the morning, all twelve had been to the dance, fortheir shoes were standing there with holes in the soles.  On thesecond and third nights there was no difference, and then his headwas struck off without mercy.
Many others came after this and undertook the enterprise, but allforfeited their lives.  Now it came to pass that a poor soldier, whohad a wound, and could serve no longer, found himself on the road tothe town where the king lived.  There he met an old woman, who askedhim where he was going.  "I hardly know myself," answered he, andadded in jest, "I had half a mind to discover where the princessesdanced their shoes into holes, and thus become king." "That is not sodifficult," said the old woman, "you must not drink the wine whichwill be brought to you at night, and must pretend to be soundasleep." With that she gave him a little cloak, and said, "If youwear this, you will be invisible, and then you can steal after thetwelve." When the soldier had received this good advice, he fell toin earnest, took heart, went to the king, and announced himself as asuitor.  He was as well received as the others, and royal garmentswere put upon him.  He was conducted that evening at bed-time intothe antechamber, and as he was about to go to bed, the eldest cameand brought him a cup of wine, but he had tied a sponge under hischin, and let the wine run down into it, without drinking a drop.
Then he lay down and when he had lain a while, he began to snore, asif in the deepest sleep.  The twelve princesses heard that, andlaughed, and the eldest said, "He, too, might as well have saved hislife." With that they got up, opened wardrobes, presses, cupboards,and brought out pretty dresses, dressed themselves before themirrors, sprang about, and rejoiced at the prospect of the dance.Only the youngest said, "I know not how it is, you are very happy,but I feel very strange, some misfortune is certainly about to befallus." "You are a goose, who are always frightened," said the eldest."Have you forgotten how many kings' sons have already come here invain.  I had hardly any need to give the soldier a sleeping-draught,the booby would not have awakened anyway."
When they were all ready they looked carefully at the soldier, but hehad closed his eyes and did not move or stir, so they felt themselvessafe enough.  The eldest then went to her bed and tapped it,whereupon it immediately sank into the earth, and one after the otherthey descended through the opening, the eldest going first.  Thesoldier, who had watched everything, tarried no longer, put on hislittle cloak, and went down last with the youngest.  Half-way downthe steps, he just trod a little on her dress, she was terrified atthat, and cried out, "What is that?  Who is pulling my dress?" "Don'tbe so silly," said the eldest, "you have caught it on a nail."
Then they went all the way down, and when they were at the bottom,they were standing in a wonderfully pretty avenue of trees, all theleaves of which were of silver, and shone and glistened. The soldierthought, "I must carry a token away with me," and broke off a twigfrom one of them, on which the tree cracked with a loud report.  Theyoungest cried out again.  "Something is wrong, did you hear thecrack?" But the eldest said, "It is a gun fired for joy, because wehave got rid of our prince so quickly." After that they came into anavenue where all the leaves were of gold, and lastly into a thirdwhere they were of bright diamonds, he broke off a twig from each,which made such a crack each time that the youngest started back interror, but the eldest still maintained that they were salutes.
They went on and came to a great lake whereon stood twelve littleboats, and in every boat sat a handsome prince, all of whom werewaiting for the twelve, and each took one of them with him, but thesoldier seated himself by the youngest.  Then her prince said, "Iwonder why the boat is so much heavier to-day. I shall have to rowwith all my strength, if I am to get it across." "What should causethat," said the youngest, "but the warm weather?" "I feel very warmtoo." On the opposite side of the lake stood a splendid, brightly-litcastle, from whence resounded the joyous music of trumpets andkettle-drums.  They rowed there, entered, and each prince danced withthe girl he loved, but the soldier danced with them unseen, and whenone of them had a cup of wine in her hand he drank it up, so that thecup was empty when she carried it to her mouth, the youngest wasalarmed at this, but the eldest always silenced her.  They dancedthere till three o'clock in the morning when all the shoes weredanced into holes, and they were forced to leave off, the princesrowed them back again over the lake, and this time the soldier seatedhimself by the eldest.
On the shore they took leave of their princes, and promised to returnthe following night.  When they reached the stairs the soldier ran onin front and lay down in his bed, and when the twelve had come upslowly and wearily, he was already snoring so loudly that they couldall hear him, and they said, "So far as he is concerned, we aresafe." They took off their beautiful dresses, laid them away, put theworn-out shoes under the bed, and lay down.  Next morning the soldierwas resolved not to speak, but to watch the wonderful goings-on, andagain went with them a second and a third night.
Then everything was just as it had been the first time, and each timethey danced until their shoes were worn to pieces.  But the thirdtime he took a cup away with him as a token.  When the hour hadarrived for him to give his answer, he took the three twigs and thecup, and went to the king, but the twelve stood behind the door, andlistened for what he was going to say.  When the king put thequestion, "Where have my twelve daughters danced their shoes topieces in the night?" He answered, "In an underground castle withtwelve princes," and related how it had come to pass, and brought outthe tokens.  The king then summoned his daughters, and asked them ifthe soldier had told the truth, and when they saw that they werebetrayed, and that falsehood would be of no avail, they were obligedto confess all.  Thereupon the king asked which of them he would haveto wife.  He answered, "I am no longer young, so give me the eldest."Then the wedding was celebrated on the self-same day, and the kingdomwas promised him after the king's death.  But the princes werebewitched for as many days as they had danced nights with the twelve.In olden times there lived an aged queen who was a sorceress, and herdaughter was the most beautiful maiden under the sun.  The old woman,however, had no other thought than how to lure mankind todestruction, and when a wooer appeared, she said that whosoeverwished to have her daughter, must first perform a task, or die.  Manyhad been dazzled by the daughter's beauty, and had actually riskedthis, but they never could accomplish what the old woman enjoinedthem to do, and then no mercy was shown, they had to kneel down, andtheir heads were struck off.
A certain king's son who had also heard of the maiden's beauty, saidto his father, "Let me go there, I want to demand her in marriage.""Never," answered the king, "if you were to go, it would be going toyour death." On this the son lay down and was sick unto death, andfor seven years he lay there, and no physician could heal him. Whenthe father perceived that all hope was over, with a heavy heart hesaid to him, "Go thither, and try your luck, for I know no othermeans of curing you." When the son heard that, he rose from his bedand was well again, and joyfully set out on his way.
And it came to pass that as he was riding across a heath, he saw fromafar something like a great heap of hay laying on the ground, andwhen he drew nearer, he could see that it was the stomach of a man,who had laid himself down there, but the stomach looked like a smallmountain.  When the fat man saw the traveler, he stood up and said,"If you are in need of any one, take me into your service." Theprince answered, "What can I do with such a clumsy man?" "Oh," saidthe stout one, "this is nothing, when I really puff myself up, I amthree thousand times fatter." "If that's the case," said the prince,"I can make use of you, come with me."
So the stout one followed the prince, and after a while they foundanother man who was lying on the ground with his ear laid to theturf.  "What are you doing there?" asked the king's son.  "I amlistening," replied the man.  "What are you listening to soattentively?" "I am listening to what is just going on in the world,for nothing escapes my ears, I even hear the grass growing." "Tellme," said the prince, "what you hear at the court of the old queenwho has the beautiful daughter." Then he answered, "I hear thewhizzing of the sword that is striking off a wooer's head." Theking's son said, "I can make use of you, come with me."
They went onwards, and then saw a pair of feet lying and part of apair of legs, but could not see the rest of the body.  When they hadwalked on for a great distance, they came to the body, and at last tothe head also.  "Why," said the prince, "what a tall rascal you are.""Oh," replied the tall one, "that is nothing at all yet, when Ireally stretch out my limbs, I am three thousand times as tall, andtaller than the highest mountain on earth.  I will gladly enter yourservice, if you will take me." "Come with me," said the prince, "Ican make use of you."
They went onwards and found a man sitting by the road who had boundup his eyes.  The prince said to him, "Have you weak eyes, that youcannot look at the light?" "No," replied the man, "but I must notremove the bandage, for whatsoever I look at with my eyes, splits topieces, so powerful is my glance.  If you can use that, I shall beglad to serve you." "Come with me," replied the king's son, "I canmake use of you."
They journeyed onwards and found a man who was lying in the hotsunshine, trembling and shivering all over his body, so that not alimb was still.  "How can you shiver when the sun is shining sowarm?" said the king's son.  "Alas," replied the man, "I am of quitea different nature.  The hotter it is, the colder I am, and the frostpierces through all my bones, and the colder it is, the hotter I am.In the midst of ice, I cannot endure the heat, nor in the midst offire, the cold." "You are a strange fellow," said the prince, "but ifyou will enter my service, follow me."
They traveled onwards, and saw a man standing who made a long neckand looked about him, and could see over all the mountains.  "Whatare you looking at so eagerly?" said the king's son.  The manreplied, "I have such sharp eyes that I can see into every forest andfield, and hill and valley, all over the world." The prince said,"Come with me if you will, for I am still in want of such an one."
And now the king's son and his six servants came to the town wherethe aged queen dwelt.  He did not tell her who he was, but said, "Ifyou will give me your beautiful daughter, I will perform any task youset me." The sorceress was delighted to get such a handsome youth asthis into her net, and said, "I will set you three tasks, and if youare able to perform them all, you shall be husband and master of mydaughter." "What is the first to be?" "You shall fetch me my ringwhich I have dropped into the red sea."
So the king's son went home to his servants and said, "The first taskis not easy.  A ring is to be got out of the red sea.  Come, findsome way of doing it." Then the man with the sharp sight said, "Iwill see where it is lying," and looked down into the water and said,"It is hanging there, on a pointed stone." The tall one carried themthither, and said, "I would soon get it out, if I could only see it.""Oh, is that all," cried the stout one, and lay down and put hismouth to the water, on which all the waves fell into it just as if ithad been a whirlpool, and he drank up the whole sea till it was asdry as a meadow.  The tall one stooped down a little, and brought outthe ring with his hand.
Then the king's son rejoiced when he had the ring, and took it to theold queen.  She was astonished, and said, "Yes, it is the right ring.You have safely performed the first task, but now comes the second.Do you see the meadow in front of my palace?  Three hundred fat oxenare feeding there, and these must you eat, skin, hair, bones, hornsand all, and down below in my cellar lie three hundred casks of wine,and these you must drink up as well, and if one hair of the oxen, orone little drop of the wine is left, your life will be forfeited tome." "May I invite no guests to this repast?" inquired the prince,"No dinner is good without some company." The old woman laughedmaliciously, and replied, "You may invite one for the sake ofcompanionship, but no more."
The king's son went to his servants and said to the stout one, "Youshall be my guest to-day, and shall eat your fill." Hereupon thestout one puffed himself up and ate the three hundred oxen withoutleaving one single hair, and then he asked if he was to have nothingbut his breakfast.  Then he drank the wine straight from the caskswithout feeling any need of a glass, and drained them down to theirdregs.
When the meal was over, the prince went to the old woman, and toldher that the second task also was performed.  She wondered at thisand said, "No one has ever done so much before, but one task stillremains," and she thought to herself, "You shall not escape me, andwill not keep your head on your shoulders." "This night," said she,"I will bring my daughter to you in your chamber, and you shall putyour arms round her, but when you are sitting there together, bewareof falling asleep.  When twelve o'clock is striking, I will come, andif she is then no longer in your arms, you are lost."
The prince thought, "The task is easy, I will most certainly keep myeyes open." Nevertheless he called his servants, told them what theold woman had said, and remarked, "Who knows what treachery lurksbehind this?  Foresight is a good thing - keep watch, and takecare that the maiden does not go out of my room again." When nightfell, the old woman came with her daughter, and gave her into theprinces's arms, and then the tall one wound himself round the two ina circle, and the stout one placed himself by the door, so that noliving creature could enter.  There the two sat, and the maiden spokenever a word, but the moon shone through the window on her face, andthe prince could behold her wondrous beauty.  He did nothing but gazeat her, and was filled with love and happiness, and his eyes neverfelt weary.  This lasted until eleven o'clock, when the old womancast such a spell over all of them that they fell asleep, and at theself-same moment the maiden was carried away.
Then they all slept soundly until a quarter to twelve, when the magiclost its power, and all awoke again.  "Oh, misery and misfortune,"cried the prince, "now I am lost." The faithful servants also beganto lament, but the listener said, "Be quiet, I want to listen." Thenhe listened for an instant and said, "She is on a rock, three hundredleagues from hence, bewailing her fate.  You alone, tall one, canhelp her, if you will stand up, you will be there in a couple ofsteps."
"Yes," answered the tall one, "but the one with the sharp eyes mustgo with me, that we may destroy the rock." Then the tall one took theone with bandaged eyes on his back, and in the twinkling of an eyethey were on the enchanted rock.  The tall one immediately took thebandage from the other's eyes, and he did but look round, and therock shivered into a thousand pieces. Then the tall one took themaiden in his arms, carried her back in a second, then fetched hiscompanion with the same rapidity, and before it struck twelve theywere all sitting as they had sat before, quite merrily and happily.When twelve struck, the aged sorceress came stealing in with amalicious face, as much as to say, "Now he is mine, for she believedthat her daughter was on the rock three hundred leagues off." Butwhen she saw her in the prince's arms, she was alarmed, and said,"Here is one who knows more than I do." She dared not make anyopposition, and was forced to give him her daughter.  But shewhispered in her ear, "It is a disgrace to you to have to obey commonpeople, and that you are not allowed to choose a husband to your ownliking."
On this the proud heart of the maiden was filled with anger, and shemeditated revenge.  Next morning she caused three hundred greatbundles of wood to be got together, and said to the prince thatthough the three tasks were performed, she would still not be hiswife until someone was ready to seat himself in the midst of thewood, and bear the fire.  She thought that none of his servants wouldlet themselves be burnt for him, and that out of love for her, hehimself would place himself upon it, and then she would be free.  Butthe servants said, "Every one of us has done something except thefrosty one, he must set to work, and they put him in the middle ofthe pile, and set fire to it." Then the fire began to burn, and burntfor three days until all the wood was consumed, and when the flameshad burnt out, the frosty one was standing amid the ashes, tremblinglike an aspen leaf, and saying, "I never felt such a frost during thewhole course of my life, if it had lasted much longer, I should havebeen benumbed."
As no other pretext was to be found, the beautiful maiden was nowforced to take the unknown youth as a husband.  But when they droveaway to church, the old woman said, "I cannot endure the disgrace,"and sent her warriors after them with orders to cut down all whoopposed them, and bring back her daughter.  But the listener hadsharpened his ears, and heard the secret discourse of the old woman."What shall we do?" said he to the stout one.  But he knew what todo, and spat out once or twice behind the carriage some of thesea-water which he had drunk, and a great lake arose in which thewarriors were caught and drowned.
When the sorceress perceived that, she sent her mailed knights, butthe listener heard the rattling of their armor, and undid the bandagefrom one eye of sharp-eyes, who looked for a while rather fixedly atthe enemy's troops, on which they all sprang to pieces like glass.Then the youth and the maiden went on their way undisturbed, and whenthe two had been blessed in church, the six servants took leave, andsaid to their master, "Your wishes are now satisfied, you need us nolonger, we will go our way and seek our fortunes."
Half a league from the palace of the prince's father was a villagenear which a swineherd tended his herd, and when they came thitherthe prince said to his wife, "Do you know who I really am?  I am noprince, but a herder of swine, and the man who is there with thatherd, is my father.  We two shall have to set to work also, and helphim." Then he alighted with her at the inn, and secretly told theinnkeepers to take away her royal apparel during the night.  So whenshe awoke in the morning, she had nothing to put on, and theinnkeeper's wife gave her an old gown and a pair of worstedstockings, and at the same time seemed to consider it a greatpresent, and said, "If it were not for the sake of your husband Ishould have given you nothing at all." Then the princess believedthat he really was a swineherd, and tended the herd with him, andthought to herself, "I have deserved this for my haughtiness andpride."
This lasted for a week, and then she could endure it no longer, forshe had sores on her feet.  And now came a couple of people who askedif she knew who her husband was.  "Yes," she answered, "he is aswineherd, and has just gone out with cords and ropes to try to drivea little bargain." But they said, "Just come with us, and we willtake you to him," and they took her up to the palace, and when sheentered the hall, there stood her husband in kingly raiment.  But shedid not recognize him until he took her in his arms, kissed her, andsaid, "I suffered so much for you that you, too, had to suffer forme." And then the wedding was celebrated, and he who has relatedthis, wishes that he, too, had been present at it.A woman was walking about the fields with her daughter and herstep-daughter cutting fodder, when the Lord came towards them in theform of a poor man, and asked, "Which is the way into the village?""If you want to know," said the mother, "seek it for yourself," andthe daughter added, "If you are afraid you will not find it, take aguide with you." But the step-daughter said, "Poor man, I will takeyou there, come with me."
Then God was angry with the mother and daughter, and turned His backon them, and wished that they should become as black as night and asugly as sin.  To the poor step-daughter, however, God was gracious,and went with her, and when they were near the village, He said ablessing over her, and spoke, "Choose three things for yourself, andI will grant them to you." Then said the maiden, "I should like to beas beautiful and fair as the sun," and instantly she was white andfair as day.  "Then I should like to have a purse of money whichwould never grow empty." That the Lord gave her also, but He said,"Do not forget what is best of all." Said she, "For my third wish, Idesire, after my death, to inhabit the eternal kingdom of heaven."That also was granted unto her, and then the Lord left her.
When the step-mother came home with her daughter, and they saw thatthey were both as black as coal and ugly, but that the step-daughterwas white and beautiful, wickedness increased still more in theirhearts, and they thought of nothing else but how they could do her aninjury.  The step-daughter, however, had a brother called Reginer,whom she loved much, and she told him all that had happened.  AndReginer said to her, "Dear sister, I will paint your portrait, that Imay continually see you before my eyes, for my love for you is sogreat that I should like always to look at you." Then she answered,"But, I pray you, let no one see the picture."
So he painted his sister and hung up the picture in his room, he,however, dwelt in the king's palace, for he was his coachman. Everyday he went and stood before the picture, and thanked God for thehappiness of having such a dear sister.  Now it happened that theking whom he served, had just lost his wife, who had been sobeautiful that no one could be found to compare with her, and on thisaccount the king was in deep grief. The attendants about the court,however, noticed that the coachman stood daily before this beautifulpicture, and they were jealous of him, so they informed the king.Then the latter ordered the picture to be brought to him, and when hesaw that it was like his lost wife in every respect, except that itwas still more beautiful, he fell mortally in love with it He causedthe coachman to be brought before him, and asked whom the portraitrepresented.  The coachman said it was his sister, so the kingresolved to take no one but her as his wife, and gave him a carriageand horses and splendid garments of cloth of gold, and sent him forthto fetch his chosen bride.
When Reginer came on this errand, his sister was glad, but the blackmaiden was jealous of her good fortune, and grew angry above allmeasure, and said to her mother, "Of what use are all your arts to usnow when you cannot procure such a piece of luck for me." "Be quiet,"said the old woman, "I will soon divert it to you," - and by her artsof witchcraft, she so troubled the eyes of the coachman that he washalf-blind, and she stopped the ears of the white maiden so that shewas half-deaf.  Then they got into the carriage, first the bride inher noble royal apparel, then the step-mother with her daughter, andReginer sat on the box to drive.  When they had been on the way forsome time the coachman cried,	 "Cover thee well, my sister dear,	 That the rain may not wet thee,	 That the wind may not load thee with dust,	 That thou may'st be fair and beautiful	 When thou appearest before the king."
The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said the oldwoman, "he says that you ought to take off your golden dress and giveit to your sister." Then she took it off, and put it on the blackmaiden, who gave her in exchange for it a shabby grey gown.  Theydrove onwards, and a short time afterwards, the brother again cried,	 "Cover thee well, my sister dear,	 That the rain may not wet thee,	 That the wind may not load thee with dust,	 That thou may'st be fair and beautiful	 When thou appearest before the king."
The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said the oldwoman, "he says that you ought to take off your golden hood and giveit to your sister." So she took off the hood and put it on hersister, and sat with her own head uncovered.  And they drove onfarther.  After a while, the brother once more cried,	 "Cover thee well, my sister dear,	 That the rain may not wet thee,	 That the wind may not load thee with dust,	 That thou may'st be fair and beautiful	 When thou appearest before the king."
The bride asked, "What is my dear brother saying?" "Ah," said the oldwoman, "he says you must look out of the carriage." They happened tobe on a bridge, which crossed deep water. When the bride stood up andleant forward out of the carriage, they both pushed her out, and shefell into the middle of the water.  At the same moment that she sank,a snow-white duck arose out of the mirror-smooth water, and swam downthe river.
The brother had observed nothing of it, and drove the carriage onuntil they reached the court.  Then he took the black maiden to theking as his sister, and thought she really was so, because his eyeswere dim, and he saw the golden garments glittering.  When the kingsaw the boundless ugliness of his intended bride, he was very angry,and ordered the coachman to be thrown into a pit which was full ofadders and nests of snakes.  The old witch, however, knew so well howto flatter the king and deceive his eyes by her arts, that he kepther and her daughter until she appeared quite endurable to him, andhe really married her.
One evening when the black bride was sitting on the king's knee, awhite duck came swimming up the gutter to the kitchen, and said tothe kitchen-boy, "Boy, light a fire, that I may warm my feathers."The kitchen-boy did it, and lighted a fire on the hearth.  Then camethe duck and sat down by it, and shook herself and smoothed herfeathers to rights with her bill. While she was thus sitting andenjoying herself, she asked, "What is my brother Reginer doing?" Thescullery-boy replied, "He is imprisoned in the pit with adders andwith snakes." Then she asked, "What is the black witch doing in thehouse?" The boy answered, "She is loved by the king and happy." "MayGod have mercy on him," said the duck, and swam forth by the gutter.
The next night she came again and put the same questions, and thethird night also.  Then the kitchen-boy could bear it no longer, andwent to the king and revealed all to him.  The king, however, wantedto see it for himself, and next evening went thither, and when theduck thrust her head in through the gutter, he took his sword and cutthrough her neck, and suddenly she changed into a most beautifulmaiden, exactly like the picture, which her brother had made of her.The king was full of joy, and as she stood there quite wet, he causedsplendid apparel to be brought and had her clothed in it.
Then she told how she had been betrayed by cunning and falsehood, andat last thrown down into the water, and her first request was thather brother should be brought forth from the pit of snakes, and whenthe king had fulfilled this request, he went into the chamber wherethe old witch was, and asked if she knew the punishment for one whodoes this and that, and related what had happened.  Then was she soblinded that she was aware of nothing and said, "She deserves to bestripped naked, and put into a barrel with nails, and that a horseshould be harnessed to the barrel, and the horse sent all over theworld." All of which was done to her, and to her black daughter.  Butthe king married the white and beautiful bride, and rewarded herfaithful brother, and made him a rich and distinguished man.***There was once upon a time a king who had a great forest nearhis palace, full of all kinds of wild animals.  One day he sentout a huntsman to shoot him a roe, but he did not come back.Perhaps some accident has befallen him, said the king, and thenext day he sent out two more huntsmen who were to search for him,but they too stayed away.  Then on the third day, he sent for allhis huntsmen, and said, scour the whole forest through, and donot give up until you have found all three.  But of these also,none came home again, and of the pack of hounds which they hadtaken with them, none were seen again.  From that time forth,no one would any longer venture into the forest, and it laythere in deep stillness and solitude, and nothing was seen of it,but sometimes an eagle or a hawk flying over it.  This lastedfor many years, when an unknown huntsman announced himselfto the king as seeking a situation, and offered to go into thedangerous forest.  The king, however, would not give his consent,and said, it is not safe in there, I fear it would fare with youno better than with the others, and you would never come outagain.  The huntsman replied, lord, I will venture it at my ownrisk, of fear I know nothing.The huntsman therefore betook himself with his dog to the forest.It was not long before the dog fell in with some game on the way,and wanted to pursue it, but hardly had the dog run two stepswhen it stood before a deep pool, could go no farther, and anakedarm stretched itself out of the water, seized it, and drew itunder.  When the huntsman saw that, he went back and fetchedthree men to come with buckets and bale out the water.  Whenthey could see to the bottom there lay a wild man whose bodywas brown like rusty iron, and whose hair hung over his facedown to his knees.  They bound him with cords, and ledhim away to the castle.  There was great astonishment over thewild man, the king, however, had him put in an iron cage in hiscourt-yard, and forbade the door to be opened on pain of death,and the queen herself was to take the key into her keeping.And from this time forth every one could again go into theforest with safety.The king had a son of eight years, who was once playing in thecourt-yard, and while he was playing, his golden ball fell intothe cage.  The boy ran thither and said, give me my ball out.Not till you have opened the door for me, answered the man.  No,said the boy, I will not do that, the king has forbidden it,and ran away.  The next day he again went and asked for hisball.  The wild man said, open mydoor, but the boy would not.  On the third day the king hadridden out hunting, and the boy went once more and said, Icannot open the door even if I wished, for I have not the key.Then the wild man said, it lies under your mother's pillow,you can get it there.  The boy, who wanted to have his ball back,cast all thought to the winds, and brought the key.  The dooropened with difficulty, and the boy pinched his fingers.  Whenit was open the wild man stepped out, gave him the golden ball,and hurried away.  The boy had become afraid, he called andcried after him, oh, wild man, do not go away, or I shall bebeaten.  The wild man turned back, took him up, set him on hisshoulder, and went with hasty steps into the forest.  When theking came home, he observed the empty cage, and asked the queenhow that had happened.  She knew nothing about it, and sought thekey, but it was gone.  She called the boy, but no one answered.The king sent out people to seek for him in the fields, butthey did not find him.  Then he could easily guess what hadhappened, and much grief reigned in the royal court.When the wild man had once more reached the dark forest, hetook the boy down from his shoulder, and said to him, youwill never see your father and mother again, but I will keepyou with me, for you have set me free, and I have compassionon you.  If you do all I bid you, you shall fare well.  Oftreasure and gold have I enough, and more than anyone in theworld.  He made a bed of moss for the boy on which he slept,and the next morning the man took him to a well, and said,behold, the gold well is as bright and clear as crystal, youshall sit beside it, and take care that nothing falls intoit, or it will be polluted.  I will come every evening to see ifyou have obeyed my order.  The boy placed himself by the brink ofthe well, and often saw a golden fish or a golden snake showitself therein, and took care that nothing fell in.  As he wasthus sitting, his finger hurt him so violently that heinvoluntarily put it in the water.  He drew it quickly outagain, but saw that it was quite gilded, and whatsoever painshe took to wash the gold off again, all was to no purpose.  Inthe evening iron Hans came back, looked at the boy, and said,what has happened to the well.  Nothing,nothing, he answered, and held his finger behind his back, thatthe man might not see it.  But he said, you have dipped yourfinger into the water, this time it may pass, but take careyou do not again let anything go in.  By daybreak the boy wasalready sitting by the well and watching it.  His finger hurthim again and he passed it over his head, and then unhappilya hair fell down into the well.  He took it quickly out, butit was already quite gilded.  Iron Hans came, and already knewwhat had happened.  You have let a hair fall into the well,said he.  I will allow you to watch by it once more, but if thishappens for the third time then the well is polluted, and youcan no longer remain with me.On the third day, the boy sat by the well, and did not stir hisfinger, however much it hurt him.  But the time was long tohim, and he looked at the reflection of his face on the surfaceof the water.  And as he still bent down more and more while hewas doing so, and trying to look straight into the eyes, hislong hair fell down from his shoulders into the water.  Heraised himself up quickly, but the whole of the hair of his headwas already golden and shone like the sun.  You can imagine howterrified the poor boy was.  He took his pocket-handkerchiefand tied it round his head, in order that the man might notsee it.  When he came he already knew everything, and said,take the handkerchief off.  Then the golden hair streamed forth,and let the boy excuse himself as he might, it was of no use.You have not stood the trial, and can stay here no longer.  Goforth into the world, there you will learn what poverty is.  Butas you have not a bad heart, and as I mean well by you, there isone thing I will grant you.  If you fall into any difficulty,come to the forest and cry, iron Hans, and then I will come andhelp you.  My power is great, greater than you think, and I havegold and silver in abundance.Then the king's son left the forest, and walked by beaten andunbeaten paths ever onwards until at length he reached a greatcity.  There he looked for work, but could find none, and hehad learnt nothing by which he could help himself.  At lengthhe went to the palace, and asked if they would take him in.The people aboutcourt did not at all know what use they could make of him, butthey liked him, and told him to stay.  At length the cook tookhim into his service, and said he might carry wood and water, andrake the cinders together.  Once when it so happened thatno one else was at hand, the cook ordered him to carry thefood to the royal table, but as he did not like to let hisgolden hair be seen, he kept his little cap on.  Such a thingas that had never yet come under the king's notice, and he said,when you come to the royal table you must take your hat off.  Heanswered, ah, lord, I cannot.  I have a bad sore place on myhead.  Then the king had the cook called before him and scoldedhim, and asked how he could take such a boy as that into hisservice, and that he was to send him away at once.  The cook,however, had pity on him, and exchanged him for the gardener'sboy.And now the boy had to plant and water the garden, hoe and dig,and bear the wind and bad weather.  Once in summer when he wasworking alone in the garden, the day was so warm he took hislittle cap off that the air might cool him.  As the sun shoneon his hair it glittered and flashed so that the rays fell intothe bed-room of the king's daughter, and up she sprang tosee what that could be.  Then she saw the boy, and cried tohim, boy, bring me a wreath of flowers.  He put his cap onwith all haste, and gathered wild field-flowers and bound themtogether.  When he was ascending the stairs with them, thegardener met him, and said, how can you take the king's daughter agarland of such common flowers.  Go quickly, and get another,and seek out the prettiest and rarest.  Oh, no, replied theboy, the wild ones have more scent, and will please her better.When he got into the room, the king's daughter said, takeyour cap off, it is not seemly to keep it on in my presence.He again said, I may not, I have a sore head.  She, however,caught at his cap and pulled it off, and then his golden hairrolled down on his shoulders, and it was splendid to behold.He wanted to run out, but she held him by the arm, and gave hima handful of ducats.  With these he departed, but he carednothing for the gold pieces.  He took them to the gardener, andsaid, I present them toyour children, they can play with them.  The following day theking's daughter again called to him that he was to bring her awreath of field-flowers, and when he went in with it, sheinstantly snatched at his cap, and wanted to take it away fromhim, but he held it fast with both hands.  She again gave him ahandful of ducats, but he would not keep them, and gave themto the gardener for playthings for his children.  On the thirdday things went just the same.  She could not get his cap awayfrom him, and he would not have her money.Not long afterwards, the country was overrun by war.  The kinggathered together his people, and did not know whether or nothe could offer any opposition to the enemy, who was superiorin strength and had a mighty army.  Then said the gardener's boy,I am grown up, and will go to the wars also, only give me aI am grown up, and will go the the wars also, only give me ahorse.  The others laughed, and said, seek one for yourself whenwe are gone, we will leave one behind us in the stable for you.When they had gone forth, he went into the stable, and led thehorse out.  It was lame of one foot, and limped hobbletyjig, hobblety jig, nevertheless he mounted it, and rode awayto the dark forest.  When he came to the outskirts, he called'iron Hans, three times so loudly that it echoed through thetrees.  Thereupon the wild man appeared immediately, and said,what do you desire.  I want a strong steed, for I am going to thewars.  That you shall have, and still more than you ask for.Then the wild man went back into the forest, and it was notlong before a stable-boy came out of it, who led a horse thatsnorted with its nostrils, and could hardly be restrained,and behind them followed a great troop of warriors entirelyequipped in iron, and their swords flashed in the sun.  Theyouth made over his three-legged horse to the stable-boy,mounted the other, and rode at the head of the soldiers.  Whenhe got near the battle-field a great part of the king's men hadalready fallen, and little was wanting to make the rest give way.Then the youth galloped thither with his iron soldiers, brokelike a hurricane over the enemy, and beat down all who opposedhim.  They began to flee, but the youth pursued, and neverstopped, until there was not a single man left.  Insteadof returning to the king, however, he conducted his troopby byways back to the forest, and called forth iron Hans.What do you desire, asked the wild man.  Take back your horse andyour troops, and give me my three-legged horse again.  Allthat he asked was done, and soon he was riding on his three-leggedhorse.  When the king returned to his palace, his daughter wentto meet him, and wished him joy of his victory.  I am not theone who carried away the victory, said he, but a strange knightwho came to my assistance with his soldiers.  The daughterwanted to hear who the strange knight was, but the king didnot know, and said, he followed the enemy, and I did not see himagain.  She inquired of the gardener where his boy was, but hesmiled, and said, he has just come home on his three-leggedhorse, and the others have been mocking him, and crying, herecomes our hobblety jig back again.  They asked, too, underwhat hedge have you been lying sleeping all the time.  So hesaid, I did the best of all, and it would have gone badly withoutme.  And then he was still more ridiculed.The king said to his daughter, I will proclaim a great feastthat shall last for three days, and you shall throw a goldenapple.  Perhaps the unknown man will show himself.  When thefeast was announced, the youth went out to the forest, and callediron Hans.  What do you desire, asked he.  That I may catch theking's daughter's golden apple.  It is as safe as if you hadit already, said iron Hans.  You shall likewise have a suit ofred armor for the occasion, and ride on a spirited chestnut-horse.When the day came, the youth galloped to the spot, took hisplace amongst the knights, and was recognized by no one.  Theking's daughter came forward, and threw a golden apple to theknights, but none of them caught it but he, only as soon as hehad it he galloped away.On the second day iron Hans equipped him as a white knight, andgave him a white horse.  Again he was the only one who caughtthe apple, and he did not linger an instant, but gallopedoff with it.  The king grew angry, and said, that is not allowed.He must appear before me and tell his name.  He gave the orderthat if the knight who caught the apple, should go away againthey shouldpursue him, and if he would not come back willingly, they wereto cut him down and stab him.On the third day, he received from iron Hans a suit of black armorand a black horse, and again he caught the apple.  But when he wasriding off with it, the king's attendants pursued him, andone of them got so near him that he wounded the youth's legwith the point of his sword.  The youth nevertheless escapedfrom them, but his horse leapt so violently that the helmet fellfrom the youth's head, and they could see that he had goldenhair.  They rode back and announced this to the king.The following day the king's daughter asked the gardener abouthis boy.  He is at work in the garden.  The queer creature hasbeen at the festival too, and only came home yesterday evening.He has likewise shown my children three golden apples which hehas won.The king had him summoned into his presence, and he came and againhad his little cap on his head.  But the king's daughter went upto him and took it off, and then his golden hair fell downover his shoulders, and he was so handsome that all were amazed.Are you the knight who came every day to the festival, always indifferent colors, and who caught the three golden apples, askedthe king.  Yes, answered he, and here the apples are, and hetook them out of his pocket, and returned them to the king.  Ifyou desire further proof, you may see the wound which your peoplegave me when they followed me.  But I am likewise the knightwho helped you to your victory over your enemies.  If you canperform such deeds as that, you are no gardener's boy, tell me,who is your father.  My father is a mighty king, and gold haveI in plenty as great as I require.  I well see, said the king,that I owe thanks to you, can I do anything to please you.  Yes,answered he, that indeed you can.  Give me your daughter to wife.The maiden laughed, and said, he does not stand much on ceremony,but I have already seen by his golden hair that he was nogardener's boy, and then she went and kissed him.  His father andmother came to the wedding, and were in great delight, for theyhad given up allhope of ever seeing their dear son again.  And as they were sittingat the marriage-feast, the music suddenly stopped, the doorsopened, and a stately king came in with a great retinue.  He wentup to the youth, embraced him and said, I am iron Hans, and was byenchantment a wild man, but you have set me free.  All thetreasures which I possess, shall be your property.East india was besieged by an enemy who would not retire untilhe had received six hundred dollars.  Then the townsfolk causedit to be proclaimed by beat of drum that whosoever was able toprocure the money should be burgomaster.  Now there was a poorfisherman who fished on the sea with his son, and the enemy cameand took the son prisoner, and gave the father six hundreddollars for him.  So the father went and gave them to the greatmen of the town, and the enemy departed, and the fisherman becameburgomaster.  Then it was proclaimed that whosoever did not say'mr. Burgomaster, should be put to death on the gallows.The son got away again from the enemy, and came to a greatforest on a high mountain.  The mountain opened, and he wentinto a great enchanted castle, wherein chairs, tables, andbenches were all hung with black.  Then came three youngprincesses who were dressed entirely in black, but had a littlewhite on their faces.  They told him he was not to be afraid,they would not hurt him, and that he could rescue them.  Hesaid he would gladly do that, if he did but know how.  Atthis, they told him he must for a whole year not speak to themand also not look at them, and what he wanted to have he wasjust to ask for, and if they dared give him an answer they woulddo so.  When he had been there for a long while he saidhe should like to go to his father, and they told him he mightgo.  He was to take with him this purse with money, put on thiscoat, and in a week he must be back there again.Then he was lifted up, and was instantly in east india.  He couldno longer find his father in the fisherman's hut, and asked thepeople where the poor fisherman could be, and they told him hemust not say that, or he would come to the gallows.  Then hewent to his father and said, fisherman, how have you got here.Then the father said, you must not say that, if the great menof the town knew of that, you would come to the gallows.  He,however, would not give in, and was brought to the gallows.When he was there, he said, o, my masters, just give me leave togo to the old fisherman's hut.  Then he put on his old smock, andcame back to the great men, and said, do you not now see.  Am Inot the son of the poor fisherman.  Did I not earn bread for myfather and mother in this dress.  Hereupon his father knew himagain, and begged his pardon, and took him home with him, and thenrelated all that had happened to him, and how he had got into aforest on a high mountain, and the mountain had opened and hehad gone into an enchanted castle, where all was black, and threeyoung princesses had come to him who were black except a littlewhite on their faces.  And they had told him not to fear, andthat he could rescue them.  Then his mother said that mightvery likely not be a good thing to do, and that he ought to takea blessed candle with him, and drop some boiling wax on theirfaces.He went back again, and he was in great fear, and he droppedthe wax on their faces as they were sleeping, and they allturned half-white.  Then all the three princesses sprang up, andsaid, you accursed dog, our blood shall cry for vengeance on you.Now there is no man born in the world, nor will any ever be bornwho can set us free.  We have still three brothers who are boundby seven chains - they shall tear you to pieces.  Then there wasa loud shrieking all over the castle, and he sprang out of thewindow, and broke his leg, and the castle sank into the earthagain, the mountain closed again, and no one knew where the castlehad stood.Between werrel and soist there lived a man whose name was knoist,and he had three sons.  One was blind, the other lame, and thethird stark-naked.  Once on a time they went into a field,and there they saw a hare.  The blind one shot it, the lame onecaught it, the naked one put it in his pocket.  Then they came toa mighty big lake, on which there were three boats, one sailed,one sank, the third had no bottom to it.  They all three gotinto the one with no bottom to it.  Then they came to a mightybig forest in which there was a mighty big tree, in the treewas a mighty big chapel - in the chapel was a sexton made ofbeech-wood and a box-wood parson, who dealt out holy water withcudgels.               How truly happy is that one               who can from holy water run.A girl from brakel once went to St. Anne's chapel at the footof the hinnenberg, and as she wanted to have a husband, andthought there was no one else in the chapel, she sang,               oh, holy saint anne.               Help me soon to a man.               Thou know'st him right well,               by suttmer gate does he dwell,               his hair it is yellow,               thou know'st him right well.The clerk, however, was standing behind the altar and heardthat, so he cried in a very gruff voice, you shall not have him.You shall not have him.The maiden thought that the child mary who stood by her motheranne had called out that to her, and was angry, and cried,fiddle de dee, conceited thing, hold your tongue, and let yourmother speak.Whither do you go.  To walpe.  I to walpe, you to walpe, so,so, together we'll go.Have you a man.  What is his name.  Cham.  My man cham, yourman cham.  I to walpe, you to walpe, so, so, together we'll go.Have you a child, how is he styled.  Wild.  My child wild, yourchild wild, my man cham, your man cham.  I to walpe, you towalpe, so, so, together we'll go.Have you a cradle.  How do you call your cradle.  Hippodadle.  Mycradle hippodadle, your cradle hippodadle, my child wild, yourchild wild, my man cham, your man cham.  I to walpe, you towalpe, so, so, together we'll go.Have you also a drudge.  What name has your drudge.From-work-do-not-budge.  My drudge from-work-do-not-budge, yourdrudge from-work-do-not-budge, my cradle hippodadle, your cradlehippodadle, my child wild, your child wild, my man cham, yourman cham.  I to walpe, you to walpe, so, so, together we'll go.There were once a little brother and a little sister, who lovedeach other with all their hearts.  Their own mother, however, wasdead, and they had a step-mother who was not kind to them, andsecretly did everything she could to hurt them.  It so happenedthat the two were playing with other children in a meadow beforethe house, and there was a pond in the meadow which came upto one side of the house.  The children ran about it, and caughteach other, and played at counting out.          Eneke beneke, let me live,          and I to you my bird will give.          The little bird, it straw shall seek,          the straw I'll give to the cow to eat.          The pretty cow shall give me milk,          the milk I'll to the baker take.          The baker he shall bake a cake,          the cake I'll give unto the cat.          The cat shall catch some mice for that,          the mice I'll hang up in the smoke,          and then you'll see the snow.They stood in a circle while they played this, and the one towhom the word snow fell, had to run away and all the others ranafter him and caught him.  As they were running about so merrilythe step-mother watched them from the window, and grew angry.And as she understood arts of witchcraft she bewitched them both,and changed the little brother into a fish, and the little sisterinto a lamb.  Then the fish swam here and there about the pond andwas very sad, and the lambkin walked up and down the meadow,and was miserable, and could not eat or touch one blade of grass.Thuspassed a long time, and then strangers came as visitors to thecastle.  The false step-mother thought, this is a good opportunity,and called the cook and said to him, go and fetch the lamb fromthe meadow and kill it, we have nothing else for the visitors.Then the cook went away and got the lamb, and took it into thekitchen and tied its feet, and all this it bore patiently.  Whenhe had drawn out his knife and was whetting it on the door-stepto kill the lamb, he noticed a little fish swimming backwardsand forwards in the water, in front of the gutter-stone andlooking up at him.  This, however, was the brother, for when thefish saw the cook take the lamb away, it followed them and swamalong the pond to the house, then the lamb cried down to it,          ah, brother, in the pond so deep,          how sad is my poor heart.          The cook he whets his knife          to take away my life.The little fish answered,          ah, little sister, up on high          how sad is my poor heart          while in this pond I lie.When the cook heard that the lambkin could speak and said suchsad words to the fish down below, he was terrified and thoughtthis could be no common lamb, but must be bewitched by the wickedwoman in the house.  Then said he, be easy, I will not kill you,and took another sheep and made it ready for the guests, andconveyed the lambkin to a good peasant woman, to whom he relatedall that he had seen and heard.The peasant, however, was the very woman who had been foster-motherto the little sister, and she suspected at once who thelamb was, and went with it to a wise woman.  Then the wise womanpronounced a blessing over the lambkin and the little fish, bymeans of which they regained their human forms, and after thisshe took them both into a little hut in a great forest, wherethey lived alone, but were contented and happy.There were once two brothers, the one rich, the other poor.The rich one, however, gave nothing to the poor one, and hegained a scanty living by trading in corn, and often did sobadly that he had no bread for his wife and children.  Oncewhen he was wheeling a barrow through the forest he saw, onone side of him, a great, bare, naked-looking mountain, and as hehad never seen it before, he stood still and stared at it withamazement.While he was thus standing he saw twelve great, wild men comingtowards him, and as he believed they were robbers he pushed hisbarrow into the thicket, climbed up a tree, and waited to seewhat would happen.  The twelve men, however, went to themountain and cried, semsi mountain, semsi mountain, open up, andimmediately the barren mountain opened down the middle, andthe twelve went into it, and as soon as they were within, itshut.  After a short time, it opened again, and the men cameforth carrying heavy sacks on their shoulders, and when theywere all once more in the daylight they said, semsi mountain,semsi mountain, shut yourself, then the mountain closedtogether, and there was no longer any entrance to be seen to it,and the twelve went away.When they were quite out of sight the poor man got down fromthe tree, and was curious to know what was secretly hidden inthe mountain.  So he went up to it and said, semsi mountain,semsi mountain, open up, and the mountain opened up to him also.Then he went inside, and the whole mountain was a cavern full ofsilver and gold, and behind lay great piles of pearls andsparkling jewels, heaped up like corn.  The poor man hardly knewwhat to do, and whether he might take any of these treasures forhimself or not.  At last he filled his pockets with gold, buthe left the pearls and precious stones where they were.  When hecame out again he also said, semsi mountain, semsi mountain,shut yourself, and the mountain closed itself, and he went homewith his barrow.And now he had no more cause for anxiety, but could buy breadfor his wife and children with his gold, and wine into the bargain.He lived joyously and honorably, gave help to the poor, and didgood to every one.  When the money came to an end, however, hewent to his brother, borrowed a measure that held a bushel,and brought himself some more, but did not touch any of themost valuable things.  When for the third time he wanted tofetch something, he again borrowed the measure of his brother.But the rich man had long been envious of his brother'spossessions, and of the handsome household which he kept up,and could not understand from whence the riches came, and what hisbrother wanted with the measure.  Then he thought of a cunningtrick, and covered the bottom of the measure with pitch, and whenhe got the measure back a piece of gold was sticking to it.  Heat once went to his brother and asked him, what have you beenmeasuring in the bushel measure.  Corn and barley, said the other.Then he showed him the piece of gold and threatened that if he didnot tellthe truth he would accuse him before a court of justice.  The poorman then told him everything, just as it had happened.  So therich man ordered his carriage to be made ready, and drove away,resolved to use the opportunity better than his brother haddone, and to bring back with him quite different treasures.When he came to the mountain he cried, semsi mountain, semsimountain, open up.  The mountain opened, and he went inside it.There lay the treasures all before him, and for a long time hedid not know which to grab first.  At length he loaded himselfwith as many precious stones as he could carry.  He wished tocarry his burden outside, but as his heart and soul were entirelyfull of the treasures, he had forgotten the name of the mountain,and cried, simeli mountain, simeli mountain, open up.  That,however, was not the right name, and the mountain never stirred,but remained shut.  Then he was alarmed, and the longer hethought about it the more his thoughts confused themselves, andall his treasures were of no help to him.  In the evening themountain opened, and the twelve robbers came in, and when theysaw him they laughed, and cried out, bird, have we caught youat last.  Did you think we had never noticed that you hadbeen in here twice.  We could not catch you then, this thirdtime you shall not get out again.  Then he cried, it was not I,it was my brother, but let him beg for his life and say what hewould, they cut off his head.There was once a poor woman who had a son, who much wished totravel, but his mother said, how can you travel.  We have no moneyat all for you to take away with you.  Then said the son, I willmanage very well for myself.  I will always say, not much, notmuch, not much.So he walked for a long time and always said, not much, notmuch, not much.  Then he passed by a company of fishermen and said,God speed you.  Not much, not much, not much.  What do you say,churl, not much.  And when the net was drawn out they had notcaught much fish.  So one of them fell on the youth with a stick andsaid, have you never seen me threshing.  What ought I to say,then, asked the youth.  You must say - get it full, get it full.After this he again walked a long time, and said, get it full, getit full, until he came to the gallows, where they had got a poorsinner whom they were about to hang.  Then said he, good morning,get it full, get it full.  What do you say, knave, get it full.  Doyou want to make out that there are still more wicked peoplein the world.  Is not this enough.  And he again got some blowson his back.  What am I to say, then, said he.  You must say, mayGod have pity on the poor soul.Again the youth walked on for along while and said, may God havepity on the poor soul.  Then he came to a pit by which stood aknacker who was cutting up a horse.  The youth said, goodmorning.  God have pity on the poor soul.  What do you say,you ill-tempered knave, and the knacker gave him such a box onthe ear, that he could not see out of his eyes.  What am I to say,then.  You must say, let the carrion lie in the pit.So he walked on, and always said, let the carrion lie in thepit, let the carrion lie in the pit.  And he came to a cart fullof people, so he said, good morning, let the carrion lie in thepit.  Then the cart fell into a pit, and the driver took hiswhip and cracked it upon the youth, till he was forced to crawlback to his mother, and as long as he lived he never went out atraveling again.Once upon a time there lived a king and a queen, who were rich,and had everything they wanted, but no children.  The queenlamented over this day and night, and said, I am like a fieldon which nothing grows.  At last God gave her her wish, but whenthe child came into the world, it did not look like a human child,but was a little donkey.  When the mother saw that, her lamentationsand outcries began in real earnest.  She said she wouldfar rather have had no child at all than have a donkey, and thatthey were to throw it into the water that the fishes might devourit.  But the king said, no, since God has sent him he shall be myson and heir, and after my death sit on the royal throne, andwear the kingly crown.  The donkey, therefore, was brought upand grew bigger, and his ears grew up high and straight.  And hewas of a merry disposition, jumped about, played and took especialpleasure in music, so that he went to a celebrated musician andsaid, teach me your art, that I may play the lute as well as you do.Ah, dear little master, answered the musician, that would comevery hard to you, your fingers are not quite suited to it, andare far too big.  I am afraid the strings would not last.  Butno excuses were of any use.  The donkey was determined to play thelute.  And since he was persevering and industrious, he at lastlearnt to do it as well as the master himself.  The young lordlingonce went out walking full of thought and came to a well.  Helooked into it and in the mirror-clear water saw his donkey'sform.  He was so distressed about it, that he went out into thewide world and only took with him one faithful companion.  Theytraveled up and down, and at last they came into a kingdom whereand old king reigned who hada single but wonderfully beautiful daughter.  The donkey said,here we will stay, knocked at the gate, and cried, a guest iswithout.  Open, that he may enter.  When the gate was not opened,he sat down, took his lute and played it in the most delightfulmanner with his two fore-feet.  Then the door-keeper opened hiseyes, and gaped, and ran to the king and said, outside by thegate sits a young donkey which plays the lute as well as anexperienced master.  Then let the musician come to me, said theking.  But when a donkey came in, everyone began to laugh at thelute-player.  And when the donkey was asked to sit down and eatwith the servants, he was unwilling, and said, I am no commonstable-ass, Iam a noble one.  Then they said, if that is what you are, seatyourself with the soldiers.  No, said he, I will sit by the king.The king smiled, and said good-humoredly, yes, it shall be asyou will, little ass, come here to me.  Then he asked, little ass,how does my daughter please you.  The donkey turned his headtowards her, looked at her, nodded and said, I like her abovemeasure, I have never yet seen anyone so beautiful as she is.Well, then, you shall sit next her too, said the king.  That isexactly what I wish, said the donkey, and he placed himself by herside, ate and drank, and knew how to behave himself daintilyand cleanly.  When the noble beast had stayed a long time at theking's court, he thought, what good does all this do me, Ishall still have to go home again, let his head hang sadly,and went to the king and asked for his dismissal.  But the kinghad grown fond of him, and said, little ass, what ails you.  Youlook as sour as a jug of vinegar, I will give you what you want.Do you want gold.  No, said the donkey, and shook his head.Do you want jewels and rich dress.  No.  Do you wish for half mykingdom.  Indeed, no.  Then said the king, if I did but know whatwould make you content.  Will you have my pretty daughter to wife.Ah, yes, said the ass, I should indeed like her, and all at oncehe became quite merry and full of happiness, for that was exactlywhat he was wishing for.  So a great and splendid wedding washeld.  In the evening, when the bride and bridegroom were ledinto their bed-room, the king wanted to know if the ass wouldbehave well, and ordered a servant to hide himself there.  Whenthey were both within, the bridegroom bolted the door, lookedaround, and as he believed that they were quite alone, he suddenlythrew off his ass's skin, and stood there in the form of a handsomeroyal youth.  Now, said he, you see who I am, and see also thatI am not unworthy of you.  Then the bride was glad, and kissedhim, and loved him dearly.  When morning came, he jumped up, puthis animal's skin on again, and no one could have guessedwhat kind of a form was hidden beneath it.  Soon came the old king.Ah, cried he, so the little ass is already up.  But surely you aresad, said he to his daughter, that you have not got a properman for your husband.  Oh, no, dear father, I love him as well asif he were the handsomest in the world, and I will keep him as longas I live.  The king was surprised, but the servant who hadconcealed himself came and revealed everything to him.  The kingsaid, that cannot be true.  Then watch yourself the next night,and you will see it with your own eyes, and hark you, lord king,if you were to take his skin away and throw it in the fire, hewould be forced to show himself in his true shape.  Your advice isgood, said the king, and at night when they were asleep, he stolein, and when he got to the bed he saw by the light of the moona noble-looking youth lying there, and the skin lay stretched onthe ground.  So he took it away, and had a great fire lightedoutside, and threw the skin into it, and remained by it himselfuntil it was all burnt to ashes.  But since he was anxious to knowhow the robbed man would behave himself, he stayed awake the wholenight and watched.  When the youth had slept his fill, he gotup by the first light of morning, and wanted to put on theass's skin, but it was not to be found.  At this he was alarmed,and, full of grief and anxiety, said, now I shall have to contriveto escape.  But when he went out, there stood the king, who said,my son, whither away in such haste.  What have you in mind.  Stayhere, you are such a handsome man, you shall not go away from me.I will now give you half my kingdom, and after my death you shallhave the whole of it.  Then I hope that what begins so well mayend well, and I will stay with you, said the youth.  And the oldman gave him half the kingdom, and in a year's time, when he died,the youth had the whole, and after the death of his father he hadanother kingdom as well, and lived in all magnificence.A man and his wife were once sitting by the door of their house,and they had a roasted chicken set before them, and were aboutto eat it together.  Then the man saw that his aged father wascoming, and hastily took the chicken and hid it, for he wouldnot permit him to have any of it.  The old man came, took a drink,and went away.  Now the son wanted to put the roasted chicken onthe table again, but when he took it up, it had become a greattoad, which jumped into his face and sat there and never wentaway again, and if any one wanted to take it off, it lookedvenomously at him as if it would jump in his face, so that noone would venture to touch it.  And the ungrateful son was forcedto feed the toad every day, or else it fed itself on his face,and thus he went about the world knowing no rest.There were once two brothers who both served as soldiers, one ofthem was rich, and the other poor.  Then the poor one, to escapefrom his poverty, doffed his soldier's coat, and turned farmer.He dug and hoed his bit of land, and sowed it with turnip-seed.The seed came up, and one turnip grew there which became large andstrong, and visibly grew bigger and bigger, and seemed as if itwould never stop growing, so that it might have been called theprincess of turnips, for never was such an one seen before, andnever will such an one be seen again.At length it was so enormous that by itself it filled a wholecart, and two oxen were required to draw it, and the farmer hadnot the least idea what he was to do with the turnip, or whetherit would be a fortune to him or a misfortune.  At last he thought,if you sell it, what will you get for it that is of any importance,and if you eat it yourself, why, the small turnips would do youjust as much good.  It would be better to take it to the king, andmake him a present of it.So he placed it on a cart, harnessed two oxen, took it to thepalace, and presented it to the king.  What strange thing isthis, said the king.  Many wonderful things have come before myeyes, but never such a monster as this.  From what seed can thishave sprung, or are you a favorite of good fortune and have metwith it by chance.  Ah, no, said the farmer, no favoriteam I.  I am a poor soldier, who because he could no longersupport himself hung his soldier's coat on a nail and took tofarming land.  I have a brother who is rich and well known to you,lord king, but I, because I have nothing, am forgotten by everyone.Then the king felt compassion for him, and said, you shall beraised from your poverty, and shall have such gifts from me thatyou shall be equal to your rich brother.  Then he bestowedon him much gold, and lands, and meadows, and herds, and made himimmensely rich, so that the wealth of the other brother couldnot be compared with his.  When the rich brother heard what thepoor one had gained for himself with one single turnip, heenvied him, and thought in every way how he also could come by asimilar piece of luck.  He set about it in a much more cunningway, however, and took gold and horses and carried them to theking, and made certain the king would give him a much largerpresent in return.  If his brother had got so much for oneturnip, what would he not carry away with him in return for suchbeautiful things as these.  The king accepted his present, andsaid he had nothing to give him in return that was more rare andexcellent than the great turnip.  So the rich man was obliged toput his brother's turnip in a cart and have it taken to his home.There, he did not know on whom to vent his rage and anger, untilbad thoughts came to him, and he resolved to kill his brother.He hired murderers, who were to lie in ambush, and then he wentto his brother and said, dear brother, I know of a hiddentreasure, we will dig it up together, and divide it between us.The other agreed to this, and accompanied him without suspicion.While they were on their way the murderers fell on him, boundhim, and would have hanged him to a tree.  But just as they weredoing this, loud singing and the sound of a horse's feet wereheard in the distance.  On this their hearts were filled withterror, and they pushed their prisoner hastily into the sack, hungit on a branch, and took to flight.  He, however, worked up thereuntil he had made a hole in the sack through which he could put hishead.  The man who was coming by was no other than a travelingstudent, a young fellow who rode on his way through the woodjoyously singing his song.  When he who was aloft saw that someonewas passing below him, he cried, good day.  You have come ata lucky moment.  The student looked round on every side, but didnot know whence the voice came.  At last he said, who callsme.  Then an answer came from the top of the tree, raise youreyes, here I sit aloft in the sack of wisdom.  In a short timehave I learnt great things, compared with this all schools area jest, in a very short time I shall have learnt everything, andshall descend wiser than all other men.  I understand the stars,and the tracks of the winds, the sand of the sea, the healing ofillness, and the virtues of all herbs, birds and stones.  Ifyou were once within it you would feel what noble things issueforth from the sack of knowledge.The student, when he heard all this, was astonished, and said,blessed be the hour in which I have found you.  May not I alsoenter the sack for a while.  He who was above replied as ifunwillingly, for a short time I will let you get into it, ifyou reward me and give me good words, but you must wait an hourlonger, for one thing remains which I must learn before I do it.When the student had waited a while he became impatient, and beggedto be allowed to get in at once, his thirst for knowledge wasso very great.  So he who was above pretendedat last to yield, and said, in order that I may come forth fromthe house of knowledge you must let it down by the rope, andthen you shall enter it.  So the student let the sack down,untied it, and set him free, and then cried, now draw me up atonce, and was about to get into the sack.  Halt, said the other,that won't do, and took him by the head and put him upside downinto the sack, fastened it, and drew the disciple of wisdom upthe tree by the rope.  Then he swung him in the air and said, howgoes it with you, my dear fellow.  Behold, already you feel wisdomcoming, and you are gaining valuable experience.  Keep perfectlyquiet until you become wiser.  Thereupon he mounted the student'shorse and rode away, but in an hour's time sent someone to letthe student out again.At the time when our Lord still walked this earth, he and St.Peter stopped one evening at a smith's and received freequarters.  Then it came to pass that a poor beggar, hard pressedby age and infirmity, came to this house and begged alms of thesmith.  St. Peter had compassion on him and said, Lord andmaster, if it please you, cure his torments that he may be ableto win his own bread.  The Lord said kindly, smith, lend me yourforge, and put on some coals for me, and then I will make thisailing old man young again.  The smith was quite willing, andSt. Peter blew the bellows, and when the coal fire sparkled uplarge and high our Lord took the little old man, pushed him inthe forge in the midst of the red-hot fire, so that he glowed likea rose-bush, and praised God with a loud voice.  After that theLord went to the quenching tub, put the glowing little man intoit so that the water closed overhim, and after he had carefully cooled him, gave him his blessing,when behold the little man sprang nimbly out, looking fresh,straight, healthy, and as if he were but twenty.  The smith, whohad watched everything closely and attentively, invited themall to supper.  He, however, had an old half-blind crooked,mother-in-law who went to the youth, and with great earnestnessasked if the fire had burnt him much.  He answered that he had neverfelt more comfortable, and that he had sat in the red heatas if he had been in cool dew.  The youth's words echoed in theears of the old woman all night long, and early next morning,when the Lord had gone on his way again and had heartily thankedthe smith, the latter thought he might make his old mother-in-lawyoung again likewise, as he had watched everything so carefully,and it lay in the province of his trade.  So he called to ask herif she, too, would like to go bounding about like a girl ofeighteen.  She said, with all my heart, as the youth has comeout of it so well.  So the smith made a great fire, and thrustthe old woman into it, and she writhed about this way and that,and uttered terrible cries of murder.  Sit still.  Why areyou screaming and jumping about so, cried he, and as he spokehe blew the bellows again until all her rags were burnt.  Theold woman cried without ceasing, and the smith thought to himself,I have not quite the right art, and took her out and threw herinto the cooling-tub.  Then she screamed so loudly that the smith'swife upstairs and her daughter-in-law heard it, and they bothran downstairs, and saw the old woman lying in a heap in thequenching-tub, howling and screaming, with her face wrinkled andshriveled and all out of shape.  Thereupon the two, who wereboth with child, were so terrified that that very night twoboys were born who were not made like men but apes, and they raninto the woods, and from them sprang the race of apes.A certain king had three sons who were all equally dear tohim, and he did not know which of them to appoint as his successorafter his own death.  When the time came when he was about todie, he summoned them to his bedside and said, dear children,I have been thinking of something which I will declare untoyou, whichsoever of you is the laziest shall have the kingdom.The eldest said, then, father, the kingdom is mine, for I am soidle that if I lie down to rest, and a drop falls in my eye,I will not open it that I may sleep.  The second said, father,the kingdom belongs to me, for I am so idle that when I amsitting by the fire warming myself, I would rather let my heelbe burnt off than draw back my leg.  The third said, father,the kingdom is mine, for I am so idle that if I were going tobe hanged, and had the rope already round my neck, and any oneput a sharp knife into my hand with which I might cut the rope,I would rather let myself be hanged than raise my hand to the rope.When the father heard that, he said, you have carried it thefarthest, and shall be king.There was once upon a time a shepherd boy whose fame spreadfar and wide because of the wise answers which he gave to everyquestion.  The king of the country heard of it likewise, butdid not believe it, and sent for the boy.  Then he said tohim, if you can give me an answer to three questions which Iwill ask you, I will look on you as my own child, and you shalldwell with me in my royal palace.  The boy said, what are thethree questions.  The king said, the first is, how many dropsof water are there in the ocean.  The shepherd boy answered, lordking, if you will have all the rivers on earth dammed up so thatnot a single drop runs from them into the sea until I havecounted it, I will tell you how many drops there are in the sea.The king said, the next question is, how many stars are therein the sky.  The shepherd boy said, give me a great sheet ofwhite paper, and then he made so many fine points on it with apen that they couldscarcely be seen, and it was all but impossible to count them,any one who looked at them would have lost his sight.  Then hesaid, there are as many stars in the sky as there are pointson the paper.  Just count them.  But no one was able to do it.The king said, the third question is, how many seconds of timeare there in eternity.  Then said the shepherd boy, inlower pomerania is the diamond mountain, which is two mileshigh, two miles wide, and two miles deep.  Every hundredyears a little bird comes and sharpens its beak on it, andwhen the whole mountain is worn away by this, then the firstsecond of eternity will be over.The king said, you have answered the three questions like awise man, and shall henceforth dwell with me in my royalpalace, and I will regard you as my own child.There was once upon a time a little girl whose father and motherwere dead, and she was so poor that she no longer had a room tolive in, or bed to sleep in, and at last she had nothing else butthe clothes she was wearing and a little bit of bread in herhand which some charitable soul had given her.  She was good andpious, however.  And as she was thus forsaken by all the world,she went forth into the open country, trusting in the good God.Then a poor man met her, who said, ah, give me something to eat,I am so hungry.  She handed him the whole of her piece of bread,and said, may God bless you, and went onwards.  Then came a childwho moaned and said, my head is so cold, give me something tocover it with.  So she took off her hood and gave it to him.  Andwhen she had walked a little farther, she met another child whohad no jacket and was frozen with cold.  Then she gave it herown, and a little farther on one begged for a frock,and she gave away that also.  At length she got into a forestand it had already become dark, and there came yet another child,and asked for a shirt, and the good little girl thoughtto herself, it is a dark night and no one sees you, you can verywell give your shirt away, and took it off, and gave away thatalso.  And as she so stood, and had not one single thing left,suddenly some stars from heaven fell down, and they were nothingelse but hard smooth pieces of money, and although she had justgiven her shirt away, she had a new one which was of the veryfinest linen.  Then she put the money into it, and was rich allthe days of her life.A father was one day sitting at dinner with his wife and hischildren, and a good friend who had come on a visit ate withthem.  And as they thus sat, and it was striking twelve o'clock,the stranger saw the door open, and a very pale child dressedin snow-white clothes came in.  It did not look around, and itdid not speak, but went straight into the next room.  Soonafterwards it came back, and went out at the door again in thesame quiet manner.  On the second and on the third day, it camealso exactly in the same way.  At last the stranger asked thefather to whom the beautiful child that went into the next roomevery day at noon belonged.  I have never seen it, said he,neither did he know to whom it could belong.  The next day whenit again came, the stranger pointed it out to the father, whohowever did not see it, and the mother and the children alsoall saw nothing.  At this the stranger got up, went to the roomdoor, opened it a little, and peeped in.  Then he saw the childsitting on the ground, and busily digging and seeking aboutbetween the boards of the floor, butwhen it saw the stranger, it disappeared.  He now told whathe had seen and described the child exactly, and the motherrecognized it, and said, ah, it is my dear child who died amonth ago.  They took up the boards and found two farthingswhich the child had once received from its mother that itmight give them to a poor man.  It, however, had thought, youcan buy yourself a biscuit for that, and had kept the farthings,and hidden them in the openings between the boards.  And thereforeit had had no rest in its grave, and had come every day at noonto seek for these farthings.  The parents gave the money atonce to a poor man, and after that the child was never seen again.There was once a young shepherd who wanted very much to marry,and was acquainted with three sisters who were all equally pretty,so that it was difficult for him to make a choice, and he couldnot decide to give the preference to any one of them.  Then heasked his mother for advice, and she said, invite all three,and set some cheese before them, and watch how they eat it.  Theyouth did so, the first swallowed the cheese with the rind on,the second hastily cut the rind off the cheese, but she cutit so quickly that she left much good cheese with it, and threwthat away also, the third peeled the rind off carefully, and cutneither too much nor too little.  The shepherd told all this tohis mother, who said, take the third for your wife.  This he did,and lived contentedly and happily with her.A sparrow had four young ones in a swallow's nest.  When theywere fledged, some naughty boys pulled out the nest, butfortunately all the birds got safely away in the high wind.  Thenthe old bird was grieved that as his sons had all gone out intothe world, he had not first warned them of every kind of danger,and given them good instruction how to deal with each.In the autumn a great many sparrows assembled together in awheatfield, and there the old bird met his four children again,and full of joy took them home with him.  Ah, my dear sons, howI have been worrying about you all through the summer, because yougot away in the wind without my teaching.  Listen to my words,obey your father, and be well on your guard.  Little birds haveto encounter great dangers.  And then he asked the eldest wherehe had spent the summer, and how he had supported himself.  Istayed in the gardens, and looked for caterpillars and small worms,until the cherries were ripe.  Ah, my son, said the father,tit-bitsare not bad, but there is great risk about them.  On that accounttake great care of yourself henceforth, and particularly whenpeople are going about the gardens who carry long green poleswhich are hollow inside and have a little hole at the top.  Yes,father, but what if a little green leaf is stuck over the holewith wax, said the son.  Where have you seen that.  In amerchant's garden, said the youngster.  Oh, my son, merchant folksare smart folks, said the father.  If you have been among thechildren of the world, you have learned worldly craftiness enough,only see that you use it well, and do not be too confident.Then he asked the next, where have you passed your time.  Atcourt, said the son.  Sparrows and silly little birds are ofno use in that place.  There one finds much gold, velvet, silk,armor, harnesses, sparrow-hawks, screech-owls and lanners.  Keepto the horses, stable where they winnow oats, or thresh, andthen fortune may give you your daily grain of corn in peace.  Yes,father, said the son, but when the stable-boys make traps and fixtheir gins and snares in the straw, many a one is caught.Where have you seen that, said the old bird.  At court, among thestable-boys.  Oh, my son, court boys are bad boys.  If youhave been to court and among the lords, and have left no feathersthere, you have learnt a fair amount, and will know very wellhow to go about the world, but look around you and above you,for the wolves often devour the wisest dogs.The father examined the third also, where did you seek yourfortune.  I have cast my tub and rope on the cart-roads andhighways, and sometimes met with a grain of corn or barley.  Thatis indeed dainty fare, said the father, but take care what youare about and look carefully around, especially when you seeanyone stooping and about to pick up a stone, for thenyou have not much time to waste.  That is true, said the son,but what if anyone should carry a bit of rock, or ore, readybeforehand in his breast or pocket.  Where have you seen that.Among the miners, dear father.  When they get out of the pit,they generally take little bits of ore with them.  Mining folksare working folks, and clever folks.If you have been among mining lads, you have seen and learntsomething, but when you go thither beware, for many a sparrowhas been brought to a bad end by a mining boy throwing a pieceof cobalt.At length the father came to the youngest son, you, my dearchirping nestling, were always the silliest and weakest.  Staywith me, the world has many rough, wicked birds which havecrooked beaks and long claws, and lie in wait for poor littlebirds and swallow them.  Keep with those of your own kind, andpick up little spiders and caterpillars from the trees, or thehouses, and then you will live long in peace.  My dear father,he who feeds himself without injury to other people fares well,and no sparrow-hawk, eagle, or kite will hurt him if he commitshimself and his lawful food, evening and morning, faithfully toGod, who is the creator and preserver of all forest and villagebirds, who likewise heareth the cry and prayer of the youngravens, for no sparrow or wren ever falls to the ground exceptby his will.  Where have you learnt this.  The son answered,when the great blast of wind tore me away from you I came to achurch, and there during the summer I have picked up the fliesand spiders from the windows, and heard this discourse preached.The father of all sparrows fed me all thesummer through, and kept me from all misfortune and fromferocious birds.  Indeed, my dear son, if you take refuge inthe churches and help to clear away spiders and buzzing flies,and chirp unto God like the young ravens, and commendyourself to the eternal creator, all will be well with you,and that even if the whole world were full of wild malicious birds.               He who to God commits his ways,               in silence suffers, waits, and prays,               preserves his faith and conscience pure,               he is of God's protection sure.There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage.  Infront of the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees,one of which bore white and the other red roses.  She had twochildren who were like the two rose-trees, and one was calledsnow-white, and the other rose-red.  They were as good and happy,as busy and cheerful as ever two children in the world were, onlysnow-white was more quiet and gentle than rose-red.  Rose-redliked better to run about in the meadows and fields seekingflowers and catching butterflies, but snow-white sat at homewith her mother, and helped her with her house-work, or read toher when there was nothing to do.The two children were so fond of one another that they alwaysheld each other by the hand when they went out together, andwhen snow-white said, we will not leave each other, rose-redanswered, never so long as we live, and their mother wouldadd, what one has she must share with the other.They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries,and no beasts did them any harm, but came close to themtrustfully.  The little hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out oftheir hands, the roe grazed by their side, the stag leaptmerrily by them, and the birds sat still upon the boughs, andsang whatever they knew.No mishap overtook them, if they had stayed too late in theforest, and night came on, they laid themselves down near oneanother upon the moss, and slept until morning came, and theirmother knew this and did not worry on their account.Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawnhad roused them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining whitedress sitting near their bed.  He got up and looked quite kindlyat them, but said nothing and went away into the forest.  Andwhen they looked round they found that they had been sleepingquite close to a precipice, and would certainly have fallen intoit in the darkness if they had gone only a few paces further.And their mother told them that it must have been the angel whowatches over good children.Snow-white and rose-red kept their mother's little cottage soneat that it was a pleasure to look inside it.  In the summerrose-red took care of the house, and every morning laid a wreathof flowers by her mother's bed before she awoke, in which wasa rose from each tree.  In the winter snow-white lit the fire andhung the kettle on the hob.  The kettle was of brass and shonelike gold, so brightly was it polished.  In the evening, whenthe snowflakes fell, the mother said, go, snow-white, and boltthe door, and then they sat round the hearth, and the mothertook her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and thetwo girls listened as they sat and spun.  And close by them laya lamb upon the floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a whitedove with its head hidden beneath its wings.One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together,someone knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in.  Themother said, quick, rose-red, open the door, it must be a travelerwho is seeking shelter.  Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt,thinking that it was a poor man, but it was not.  It was abear that stretched his broad, black head within the door.Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dovefluttered, and snow-white hid herself behind her mother's bed.But the bear began to speak and said, do not be afraid, I willdo you no harm.  I am half-frozen, and only want to warm myselfa little beside you.Poor bear, said the mother, lie down by the fire, only takecare that you do not burn your coat.  Then she cried, snow-white,rose-red, come out, the bear will do you no harm, he means well.So they both came out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove camenearer, and were not afraid of him.  The bear said, here,children, knock the snow out of my coat a little.  So theybrought the broom and swept the bear's hide clean, and hestretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly andcomfortably.  It was not long before they grew quite at home,and played tricks with their clumsy guest.  They tugged hishair with their hands, put their feet upon his back and rolledhim about, or they took a hazel-switch and beat him, and when hegrowled they laughed.  But the bear took it all in good part, onlywhen they were too rough he called out, leave me alive, children,               snow-white, rose-red,               will you beat your wooer dead.When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mothersaid to the bear, you can lie there by the hearth, and then youwill be safe from the cold and the bad weather.  As soon as daydawned the two children let him out, and he trotted acrossthe snow into the forest.Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laidhimself down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselveswith him as much as they liked.  And they got so used to him thatthe doors were never fastened until their black friend had arrived.When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear saidone morning to snow-white, now I must go away, and cannot comeback for the whole summer.  Where are you going, then, dear bear,asked snow-white.  I must go into the forest and guard my treasuresfrom the wicked dwarfs.  In the winter, when the earth is frozenhard, they are obliged to stay below and cannot work theirway through, but now, when the sun has thawed and warmed theearth, they break through it, and come out to pry and steal.  Andwhat once gets into their hands, and in their caves, does noteasily see daylight again.Snow-white was quite sorry at his departure, and as she unboltedthe door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught againstthe bolt and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and itseemed to snow-white as if she had seen gold shining throughit, but she was not sure about it.  The bear ran away quickly,and was soon out of sight behind the trees.A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into theforest to get fire-wood.  There they found a big tree which layfelled on the ground, and close by the trunk something wasjumping backwards and forwards in the grass, but they couldnot make out what it was.  When they came nearer they saw a dwarfwith an old withered face and a snow-white beard a yard long.  Theend of the beard was caught in a crevice of the tree, and thelittle fellow was jumping about like a dog tied to a rope, and didnot know what to do.He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried, why doyou stand there.  Can you not come here and help me.  What areyou up to, little man, asked rose-red.  You stupid, pryinggoose, answered the dwarf.  I was going to split the tree to geta little wood for cooking.  The little bit of food that we peopleget is immediately burnt up with heavy logs.  We do not swallowso much as you coarse, greedy folk.  I had just driven thewedge safely in, and everything was going as I wished, but thecursed wedge was too smooth and suddenly sprang out, and the treeclosed so quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful whitebeard, so now it is tight in and I cannot get away, and the silly,sleek, milk-faced things laugh.  Ugh.  How odious you are.The children tried very hard, but they could not pull thebeard out, it was caught too fast.  I will run and fetch someone,said rose-red.  You senseless goose, snarled the dwarf.  Whyshould you fetch someone.  You are already two too many for me.Can you not think of something better.  Don't be impatient, saidsnow-white, I will help you, and she pulled her scissors out ofher pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag whichlay amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold,and lifted it up, grumbling to himself, uncouth people, to cutoff apiece of my fine beard.  Bad luck to you, and then he swung thebag upon his back, and went off without even once looking atthe children.Some time afterwards snow-white and rose-red went to catch adish of fish.  As they came near the brook they saw somethinglike a large grasshopper jumping towards the water, as ifit were going to leap in.  They ran to it and found it was thedwarf.  Where are you going, said rose-red, you surely don'twant to go into the water.  I am not such a fool, cried thedwarf.  Don't you see that the accursed fish wants to pullme in.  The little man had been sitting there fishing, andunluckily the wind had tangled up his beard with the fishing-line.A moment later a big fish made a bite and the feeblecreature had not strength to pull it out.  The fish kept theupper hand and pulled the dwarf towards him.  He held on toall the reeds and rushes, but it was of little good, for hewas forced to follow the movements of the fish, and was inurgent danger of being dragged into the water.The girls came just in time.  They held him fast and tried tofree his beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and linewere entangled fast together.  There was nothing to do but tobring out the scissors and cut the beard, whereby a small partof it was lost.  When the dwarf saw that he screamed out,is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure a man's face.  Wasit not enough to clip off the end of my beard.  Now you havecut off the best part of it.  I cannot let myself be seen bymy people.  I wish you had been made to run the soles off yourshoes.  Then he took out a sack of pearls which lay in therushes, and without another word he dragged it away anddisappeared behind a stone.It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two childrento the town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons.  Theroad led them across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock laystrewn about.  There they noticed a large bird hovering in theair, flying slowly round and round above them.  It sank lower andlower, and at last settled near a rock not far away.  Immediatelythey heard a loud, piteous cry.  They ran up and saw with horrorthat theeagle had seized their old acquaintance the dwarf, and was goingto carry him off.The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the littleman, and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he lethis booty go.  As soon as the dwarf had recovered from hisfirst fright he cried with his shrill voice, could you not havedone it more carefully.  You dragged at my brown coat so that itis all torn and full of holes, you clumsy creatures.  Then hetook up a sack full of precious stones, and slipped away againunder the rock into his hole.  The girls, who by this timewere used to his ingratitude, went on their way and did theirbusiness in the town.As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprisedthe dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones ina clean spot, and had not thought that anyone would come thereso late.  The evening sun shone upon the brilliant stones.They glittered and sparkled with all colors so beautifully thatthe children stood still and stared at them.  Why do you standgaping there, cried the dwarf, and his ashen-gray face becamecopper-red with rage.  He was still cursing when a loudgrowling was heard, and a black bear came trotting towards themout of the forest.  The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but hecould not reach his cave, for the bear was already close.  Thenin the dread of his heart he cried, dear mr. Bear, spare me, Iwill give you all my treasures, look, the beautiful jewelslying there. Grant me my life.  What do you want with such aslender little fellow as I.  You would not feel me betweenyour teeth.  Come, take these two wicked girls, they are tendermorsels for you, fat as young quails, for mercy's sake eat them.The bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creaturea single blow with his paw, and he did not move again.The girls had run away, but the bear called to them, snow-whiteand rose-red, do not be afraid.  Wait, I will come with you.Then they recognised his voice and waited, and when he came upto them suddenly his bearskin fell off, and he stood there,a handsome man, clothed all in gold.  I am a king's son, he said,and I was bewitched by that wicked dwarf, who had stolen mytreasures.I have had to run about the forest as a savage bear until I wasfreed by his death.  Now he has got his well-deserved punishment.Snow-white was married to him, and rose-red to his brother,and they divided between them the great treasure which the dwarfhad gathered together in his cave.  The old mother livedpeacefully and happily with her children for many years.  She tookthe two rose-trees with her, and they stood before her window, andevery year bore the most beautiful roses, white and red.Let no one ever say that a poor tailor cannot do great thingsand win high honors.  All that is needed is that he should go tothe right smithy, and what is of most consequence, that heshould have good luck.  A civil, smart tailor's apprenticeonce went out traveling, and came into a great forest, and,as he did not know the way, he lost himself.  Night fell andnothing was left for him to do in this painful solitude, but toseek a bed.  He might certainly have found a good bed on thesoft moss, but the fear of wild beasts let him have no restthere, and at last he made up his mind to spend the night ina tree.  He sought out a high oak, climbed up to the top of it,and thanked God that he had his goose with him, for otherwisethe wind which blew over the top of the tree would have carriedhim away.After he had spent some hours in the darkness, not without fearand trembling, he saw at a very short distance the glimmer of alight, and as he thought that a human habitation might be there,where he would be better off than on the branches of a tree, hegot carefully down and went towards the light.  It guided himto a small hut that was woven together of reeds and rushes.  Heknockedboldly, the door opened, and by the light which came forth he sawa little hoary old man who wore a coat made of bits of coloredstuff sewn together.  Who are you, and what do you want, askedthe man in a grumbling voice.  I am a poor tailor, he answered,whom night has surprised here in the wilderness, and I earnestlybeg you to take me into your hut until morning.  Go your way,replied the old man in a surly voice, I will have nothing to dowith tramps, seek for yourself a shelter elsewhere.  Having saidthis, he was about to slip into his hut again, but the tailorheld him so tightly by the corner of his coat, and pleaded sopiteously, that the old man, who was not so ill-natured as hewished to appear, was at last softened, and took him into thehut with him where he gave him something to eat, and then offeredhim a very good bed in a corner.The weary tailor needed no rocking, but slept sweetly till morning,but even then would not have thought of getting up, if he hadnot been aroused by a great noise.  A violent sound of screamingand roaring forced its way through the thin walls of the hut.The tailor, full of unwonted courage, jumped up, put his clotheson in haste, and hurried out.  Then close by the hut, he sawa great black bull and a beautiful stag, which were justpreparing for a violent struggle.  They rushed at each other withsuch extreme rage that the ground shook with their trampling,and the air resounded with their cries.  For a long time itwas uncertain which of the two would gain the victory, atlength the stag thrust his horns into his adversary's body,whereupon the bull fell to the earth with a terrific roar, andwas finished off by a few strokes from the stag.The tailor, who had watched the fight with astonishment, wasstill standing there motionless, when the stag in full careerbounded up to him, and before he could escape, caught him upon his great horns.  He had not much time to collect his thoughts,for it went in a swift race over stock and stone, mountain andvalley, wood and meadow.  He held with both hands to the endsof the horns, and resigned himself to his fate.  It seemedto him just as if he were flying away.  At length the stagstopped in front of a wall of rock, and gently let the tailordown.  The tailor, more dead than alive, requiredsome time to come to himself.  When he had in some degreerecovered, the stag, which had remained standing by him, pushedits horns with such force against a door in the rock, thatit sprang open.  Flames of fire shot forth, after which followeda great smoke, which hid the stag from his sight.  The tailordid not know what to do, or whither to turn, in order to getout of this desert and back to human beings again.  Whilsthe was standing thus undecided, a voice sounded out of the rock,which cried to him, enter without fear, no evil shall befall you.He hesitated, but driven by a mysterious force, he obeyed thevoice and went through the iron-door into a large spacioushall, whose ceiling, walls and floor were made of shining polishedsquare stones, on each of which were carved signs which wereunknown to him.  He looked at everything full of admiration,and was on the point of going out again, when he once moreheard the voice which said to him, step on the stonewhich lies in the middle of the hall, and great good fortuneawaits you.His courage had already grown so great that he obeyed the order.The stone began to give way under his feet, and sank slowly downinto the depths.  When it was once more firm, and the tailor lookedround, he found himself in a hall which in size resembled theformer.  Here, however, there was more to look at and to admire.Hollow places were cut in the walls, in which stood vases oftransparent glass and filled with colored spirit or with abluish vapor.  On the floor of the hall two great glass chestsstood opposite to each other, which at once excited his curiosity.When he went to one of them he saw inside it a handsome structurelike a castle surrounded by farm-buildings, stables and barns,and a quantity of other good things.  Everything was small, butexceedingly carefully and delicately made, and seemed to becarved out by a dexterous hand with the greatest precision.He might not have turned away his eyes from the considerationof this rarity for some time, had not the voice once more madeitself heard.  It ordered him to turn round and look at theglass chest which was standing opposite.  How his admirationincreased whenhe saw therein a maiden of the greatest beauty.  She lay as ifasleep, and was wrapped in her long fair hair as in aprecious mantle.  Her eyes were closely shut, but the brightnessof her complexion and a ribbon which her breathing moved toand fro, left no doubt that she was alive.  The tailor waslooking at the beauty with beating heart, when she suddenlyopened her eyes, and started up at the sight of him with a shockof joy.  Divine providence, cried she, my deliverance isat hand.  Quick, quick, help me out of my prison.  If youpush back the bolt of this glass coffin, then I shall be free.The tailor obeyed without delay, and she immediately raised upthe glass lid, came out and hastened into the corner of the hall,where she covered herself with a large cloak.  Then she seatedherself on astone, ordered the young man to come to her, and after she hadimprinted a friendly kiss on his lips, she said, my long-desireddeliverer, kind heaven has guided you to me, and put an endto my sorrows.  On the self-same day when they end, shall yourhappiness begin.  You are the husband chosen for me by heaven, andshall pass your life in unbroken joy, loved by me, and rich tooverflowing in every earthly possession.  Seat yourself, andlisten to the story of my life.I am the daughter of a rich count.  My parents died when I wasstill in my tender youth, and recommended me in their last willto my elder brother, by whom I was brought up.  We loved eachother so tenderly, and were so alike in our way of thinkingand our inclinations, that we both embraced the resolutionnever to marry, but to stay together to the end of our lives.In our house there was no lack of company.  Neighbors and friendsvisited us often, and we showed the greatest hospitality toevery one.  So it came to pass one evening that a stranger cameriding to our castle, and, under pretext of not being able toget on to the next place, begged for shelter for the night.We granted his request with ready courtesy, and he entertained usin the most agreeable manner during supper by conversationintermingled with stories.  My brother liked the stranger somuch that he begged him to spend a couple of days with us, towhich, after some hesitation, he consented.  We did not risefrom table until late in the night, the stranger was shown toa room, and I hastened, as I was tired, to lay my limbs inmy soft bed.  Hardly had I fallen off to sleep, when the soundof faint and delightful music awoke me.  As I could notconceive from whence it came, I wanted to summon my waiting-maidwho slept in the next room, but to my astonishment I found thatspeech was taken away from me by an unknown force.  I felt as ifa nightmare were weighing down my breast, and was unable to makethe very slightest sound.  In the meantime, by the light ofmy night-lamp, I saw the stranger enter my room through twodoors which were fast bolted.  He came to me and said, thatby magic arts which were at his command, he had caused thelovely music to sound in order to awaken me, andthat he now forced his way through all fastenings with theintention of offering his hand and heart.  My dislike of hismagic arts was so great, however, that I refused to answer him.He remained for a time standing without moving, apparently withthe idea of waiting for a favorable decision, but as I continuedto keep silence, he angrily declared he would revenge himselfand find means to punish my pride, and left the room.  Ipassed the night in the greatest disquietude, and fell asleeponly towards morning.  When I awoke, I hurried to my brother, butdid not find him in his room, and the attendants told me that hehad ridden forth with the stranger to the chase at daybreak.
I at once suspected nothing good.  I dressed myself quickly,ordered my palfrey to be saddled, and accompanied only by oneservant, rode full gallop to the forest.  The servant fell withhis horse, and could not follow me, for the horse had broken itsfoot.  I pursued my way without halting, and in a few minutesI saw the stranger coming towards me with a beautiful stag whichhe led by a cord.  I asked him where he had left my brother, andhow he had come by this stag, out of whose great eyes I sawtears flowing.  Instead of answering me, he began to laughloudly.  I fell into a great rage at this, pulled out a pistoland discharged it at the monster, but the ball rebounded fromhis breast and went into my horse's head.  I fell to the ground,and the stranger muttered some words which deprived me ofconsciousness.When I came to my senses again I found myself in this undergroundcave in a glass coffin.  The magician appeared once again, andsaid he had changed my brother into a stag, my castle with allthat belonged to it, diminished in size by his arts, he hadshut up in the other glass chest, and my people, who were allturned into smoke, he had confined in glass bottles.  Hetold me that if I would now comply with his wish, it would be aneasy thing for him to put everything back in its former state, ashe had nothing to do but open the vessels, and everything wouldreturn once more to its natural form.  I answered him as littleas I had done the first time.  He vanished and left me in myprison, in which a deep sleep came on me.Among the visions which passed before my eyes, the mostcomforting was that in which a young man came and set me free,and when I opened my eyes to-day I saw you, and beheld mydream fulfilled.  Help me to accomplish the other thingswhich happened in those visions.  The first is that we lift theglass chest in which my castle is enclosed, on to that broad stone.As soon as the stone was laden, it began to rise up on high withthe maiden and the young man, and mounted through the openingof the ceiling into the upper hall, from whence they then couldeasily reach the open air.  Here the maiden opened the lid, andit was marvellous to behold how the castle, the houses, andthe farm buildings which were enclosed, stretched themselves outand grew to their natural size with the greatest rapidity.After this, the maiden and the tailor returned to the cave beneaththe earth, and had the vessels which were filled with smokecarried up by the stone.  The maiden had scarcely opened thebottles when the blue smoke rushed out and changed itself intoliving men, in whom she recognized her servants and her people.Her joy was still more increased when her brother, who hadkilled the magician in the form of the bull, came out of theforest towards them in his human form, and on the self-same daythe maiden, in accordance with her promise, gave her hand at thealtar to the lucky tailor.Harry was lazy, and although he had nothing else to do butdrive his goat daily to pasture, he nevertheless groanedwhen he went home after his day's work was done.  It is indeeda heavy burden, said he, and a wearisome employment to drivea goat into the field this way year after year, till late intothe autumn.  If one could but lie down and sleep, but no, onemust haveone's eyes open lest the goat hurts the young trees, or squeezesitself through the hedge into a garden, or runs away altogether.How can one have any rest, or enjoy one's life.  He seatedhimself, collected his thoughts, and considered how he couldset his shoulders free from this burden.  For a long time allthinking was to no purpose, but suddenly it was as if scalesfell from his eyes.  I know what I will do, he cried, I willmarry fat trina who has also a goat, and can take mine out withhers, and then I shall have no more need to trouble myself.So harry got up, set his weary legs in motion, and went rightacross the street, for it was no farther, to where the parents offat trina lived, and asked for their industrious and virtuousdaughter in marriage.  The parents did not reflect long.  Birdsof a feather, flock together, they thought, and consented.So fat trina became harry's wife, and led out both the goats.Harry had a good time of it, and had no work that he required torest from but his own idleness.  He went out with her only nowand then, and said, I merely do it that I may afterwards enjoyrest more, otherwise one loses all feeling for it.But fat trina was no less idle.  Dear harry, said she one day,why should we make our lives so toilsome when there is no needfor it, and thus ruin the best days of our youth.  Would it notbe better for us to give the two goats which disturb us everymorning in our sweetest sleep with their bleating, to ourneighbor, and he will give us a beehive for them.  We will putthe beehive in a sunny place behind the house, and troubleourselves no more about it.  Bees do not require to be takencare of, or driven into the field.  They fly out and find the wayhome again for themselves, and collect honey without giving thevery least trouble.  You have spoken like a sensible woman,replied harry.  We will carry out your proposal without delay,and besides all that, honey tastes better and nourishes onebetter than goat's milk, and it can be kept longer too.The neighbor willingly gave a beehive for the two goats.  Thebees flew in and out from early morning till late eveningwithout ever tiring, and filled the hive with the most beautifulhoney, sothat in autumn harry was able to take a whole pitcherful out ofit.They placed the jug on a board which was fixed to the wall oftheir bed-room, and as they were afraid that it might be stolen,or that the mice might find it, trina brought in a stouthazel-stick and put it beside her bed, so that withoutunnecessary motion she might reach it with her hand, and driveaway the uninvited guests.Lazy harry did not like to leave his bed before noon.  He whorises early, said he, wastes his substance.  One morning whenhe was still lying amongst the feathers in broad daylight,resting after his long sleep, he said to his wife, women arefond of sweet things, and you are always tasting the honey inprivate.  It will be better for us to exchange it for a goosewith a young gosling, before you eat up the whole of it.  But,answered trina, not before we have a child to take care of them.Am I to worry myself with the little geese, and spend all mystrength on them to no purpose.  Do you think, said harry, thatthe youngster will look after geese.  Now-a-days children nolonger obey, they do according to their own fancy, because theyconsider themselves cleverer than their parents, just likethat lad who was sent to seek the cow and chased three blackbirds.Oh, replied trina, this one shall fare badly if he does not dowhat I say.  I will take a stick and belabor his skin with moreblows than I can count.  Look, harry, cried she in her zeal, andseized the stick with which she used to drive the mice away, look,this is the way I will fall on him.  She reached her arm outto strike, but unhappily hit the honey-pitcher above the bed.The pitcher struck against the wall and fell down in shards,and the fine honey streamed out on the ground.  There lie thegoose and the young gosling, saidharry, and want no looking after.  But it is lucky that thepitcher did not fall on my head.  We have all reason to besatisfied with our lot.  And then as he saw that there was stillsome honey in one of the shards he stretched out his hand forit, and said quite gaily, the remains, my wife, we will stilleat with relish, and we will rest a little after the fright wehave had.  What does it matter if we do get up a little later.The day is always long enough.  Yes, answered trina, we shallalways get to the end of it at the proper time.  You know, thesnail was once asked to a wedding and set out to go, but arrivedat the christening.  In front of the house it fell over thefence, and said, speed does no good.There was once upon a time a king, but where he reigned and whathe was called, I do not know.  He had no son, but an only daughterwho had always been ill, and no doctor had been able to cure her.Then it was foretold to the king that his daughter would find herhealth by eating an apple.  So he ordered it to be proclaimedthroughout the whole of his kingdom, that whosoever brought hisdaughter an apple with which she could find her health, shouldhave her to wife, and be king.  This became known to a peasantwho had three sons, and he said to the eldest, go out into thegarden and take a basketful of those beautiful apples withthe red cheeks and carry them to the court, perhaps the king'sdaughter will be able to find her health with them, and then youwill marry her and be king.  The lad did so, and set out.  Whenhe had gone a short way he met a hoary little man who asked himwhat he had there in the basket, to which replied uele for so washe named, frogs, legs.  At this the little man said, well, soshall it be, and remain, and went away.  At length uele arrived atthe palace, and made it known that he had brought apples whichwould cure the king's daughter if she ate them.  This delighted theking hugely, and he caused uele to be brought before him, but,alas.  When he opened the basket, instead of having apples in it hehad frogs, legs which were still kicking about.  On this the kinggrew angry, and had him driven out of the house.  When he got homehe told his father how it had fared with him.  Then the fathersent the next son, who was called same, but all went with him justas it had gone with uele.  He also met the hoary little man,who asked what he had there in the basket.  Same said, hogs,bristles, and the hoary man said, well, so shall it be, and remain.When same got to the king's palace and said he brought apples withwhich the king's daughter might find her health, they did notwant to let him go in, and said that one fellow had already beenthere, and had treated them as if they were fools.  Same, however,maintained that he certainly had the apples, and that they oughtto let him go in.  At length they believed him, and led him to theking.  But when he uncovered the basket, he had but hogs, bristles.This enraged the king most terribly, so he caused same to be whippedout of the house.  When he got home he related all that had befallenhim, whereupon the youngest boy, whose name was Hans, but who wasalways called stupid Hans, came and asked his father if he mightgo with some apples.  Oh, said the father, you would be just theright fellow for such a thing.  If the clever one can't manage it,what can you do.  The boy, however, insisted and said, indeed,father, I wish to go.  Just get away, you stupid fellow, you mustwait till you are wiser, said the father to that, and turned hisback.  Hans, however, pulled at the back of his smock andsaid, indeed, father, I wish to go.  Well, then, so far as I amconcerned you may go, but you will soon come home again, repliedthe old man in a spiteful voice.  The boy was tremendously delightedand jumped for joy.  Well, act like a fool.  You grow more stupidevery day, said the father again.  But Hans was not discouraged, anddid not let it spoil his pleasure, but as it was then night, hethought he might as well wait until the morrow, for he couldnot get to court that day.  All night long he could not sleep in hisbed, and if he did doze for a moment, he dreamt of beautifulmaidens, of palaces, of gold, and of silver, and all kinds of thingsof that sort.  Early in the morning, he went forth on his way, anddirectly afterwards the little shabby-looking man in his icyclothes, came to him and asked what he was carrying in the basket.Hans gave him the answer that he was carrying apples with which theking's daughter was to find her health.  Then, said the little man,so shall they be, and remain.  But at the court they would none ofthem let Hans go in, for they said two had already been there whohad told them that they were bringing apples, and one of them hadfrogs, legs, and the other hogs, bristles.  Hans, however,resolutely maintained that he most certainly had no frogs, legs,but some of the most beautiful apples in the whole kingdom.  As hespoke so pleasantly, the door-keeper thought he could not betelling a lie, and asked him to go in, and he was right, for whenHans uncovered his basket in the king's presence, golden-yellowapples came tumbling out.  The king was delighted, and caused someof them to betaken to his daughter, and then waited in anxious expectation untilnews should be brought to him of the effect they had.  Butbefore much time had passed by, news was brought to him.  And whodo you think it was who came.  It was the daughter herself.  Assoon as she had eaten of those apples, she was cured, and sprangout of her bed.  The joy the king felt cannot be described.  Butnow he did not want to give his daughter in marriage to Hans, andsaid he must first make him a boat which would go quicker on dryland than on water.  Hans agreed to the condition, and went home,and related how it had fared with him.  Then the father sentuele intothe forest to make a boat of that kind.  He worked diligently,and whistled all the time.  At mid-day, when the sun was atits highest, came the little icy man and asked what he was making.Uele gave him for answer, wooden bowls for the kitchen.  Theicy man said, so it shall be, and remain.  By evening uelethought he had now made the boat, but when he wanted to getinto it, he had nothing but wooden bowls.  The next day samewent into the forest, but everything went with him just as ithad done with uele.  On the third day stupid Hans went.  He workedaway most industriously, so that the whole forest resoundedwith the heavy blows, and all the while he sang and whistledright merrily.  At mid-day, when it was the hottest, the littleman came again, and asked what he was making.  A boat which willgo quicker on dry land than on water, replied Hans, and whenI have finished it, I am to have the king's daughter for my wife.Well, said the little man, such an one shall it be, and remain.In the evening, when the sun had turned into gold, Hans finishedhis boat, and all that was wanted for it.  He got into it androwed to the palace.  The boat went as swiftly as the wind.  Theking saw it from afar, but would not give his daughter to Hansyet, and said he must first take a hundred hares out to pasturefrom early morning until late evening, and if one of them gotaway, he should not have his daughter.  Hans was contentedwith this, and the next day went with his flock to the pasture,and took great care that none of them ran away.Before many hours had passed came a servant from the palace, andtold Hans that he must give her a hare instantly, for somevisitors had come unexpectedly.  Hans, however, was very wellaware what that meant, and said he would not give her one.  Theking might set some hare soup before his guest next day.  Themaid, however, would not accept his refusal, and at last shebegan to argue with him.  Then Hans said that if the king'sdaughter came herself, he would give her a fare.  The maid toldthis in the palace, and the daughter did go herself.  In themeantime the little man came again to Hans, and asked him what hewas doing there.  He said he had to watch over a hundred haresand see that none of them ran away,and then he might marry the king's daughter and be king.  Good,said the little man, there is a whistle for you, and if one ofthem runs away, just whistle with it, and then it will comeback again.  When the king's daughter came, Hans gave her ahare into her apron, but when she had gone about a hundred stepswith it, he whistled, and the hare jumped out of the apron,and before she could turn round was back to the flock again.When the evening came the hare-herd whistled once more, andlooked to see if all were there, and then drove them to thepalace.  The king wondered how Hans had been able to take ahundred hares to graze without losing any of them, but he stillwould not give him his daughter yet, and said he must nowbring him a feather from the griffin's tail.  Hans set out atonce, and walked straight forwards.  In the evening he cameto a castle, and there he asked for a night's lodging, for atthat time there were no inns.  The lord of the castle promisedhim that with much pleasure, and asked where he was going.  Hansanswered, to the griffin.  Oh, to the griffin.  They tell mehe knows everything, and I have lost the key of an iron money-chest.So you might be so good as to ask him where it is.  Yes,indeed, said Hans, I will do that.  Early the next morning hewent onwards, and on his way arrived at another castle in whichhe again stayed the night.  When the people who lived therelearnt that he was going to the griffin, they said they hadin the house a daughter who was ill, and that they had alreadytried every means to cure her, but none of them had done herany good, and he might be so kind as to ask the griffin whatwould make their daughter healthy again.  Hans said he wouldwillingly do that, and went onwards.  Then he came to a lake,and instead of a ferry-boat, a tall, tall man was there whohad to carry everybody across.  The man asked Hans whither he wasjourneying.  To the griffin, said Hans.  Then when you get tohim, said the man, just ask him why I am forced to carryeverybody over the lake.  Yes, indeed, most certainly I'll dothat, said Hans.  Then the man took him up on his shoulders, andcarried him across.  At length Hans arrived at the griffin'shouse, but the wife only was at home, and not the griffinhimself.  Then the woman asked him what he wanted.  Thereupon hetold her everything - that he had to get a feather out of thegriffin's tail, and that there was a castle where they had lostthe key of their money-chest, and he was to ask the griffin whereit was - that in another castle the daughter was ill, andhe was to learn what would cure her - and then not far from thencethere was a lake and a man beside it, who was forced to carrypeople across it, and he was very anxious to learn why the manwas obliged to do it.  Then said the woman, look here, my goodfriend, no christian can speak to the griffin.  He devours themall, but if you like you can lie down under his bed, and in thenight, when he is quite fast asleep, you can reach out and pulla feather out of his tail, and as for those things which youare to learn, I will ask about them myself.  Hans was quitesatisfied withthis, and got under the bed.  In the evening, the griffin camehome, and as soon as he entered the room, said, wife, I smella christian.  Yes, said the woman, one was here to-day, but hewent away again.  And on that the griffin said no more.In the middle of the night when the griffin was snoring loudly,Hans reached out and plucked a feather from his tail.  Thegriffin woke up instantly, and said, wife, I smell a christian,and it seems to me that somebody was pulling at my tail.  Hiswife said, you have certainly been dreaming, and I told youbefore that a christian was here to-day, but that he went awayagain.  He told me all kinds of things - that in one castle theyhad lost the key of their money-chest, and could find it nowhere.Oh.  The fools, said the griffin.  The key lies in the wood-houseunder a log of wood behind the door.  And then he said that inanother castle the daughter was ill, and they knew no remedythat would cure her.  Oh.  The fools, said the griffin.  Underthe cellar-steps a toad has made its nest of her hair, and ifshe got her hair back she would be well.  And then he alsosaid that there was a place where there was a lake and a manbeside it who was forced to carry everybody across.  Oh, thefool, said the griffin.  If he only put one man down in themiddle, he would never have to carry another across.  Early thenext morning the griffin got up and went out.  Then Hanscame forth from under the bed, and he had a beautiful feather,and had heard what the griffin had said about the key, andthe daughter, and the man.  The griffin's wife repeated it allonce more to him that he might not forget it, and then he wenthome again.  First he came to the man by the lake, who askedhim what the griffin had said, but Hans replied that he mustfirst carry him across, and then he would tell him.  So the mancarried him across, and when he was over Hans told him that allhe had to do was to set one person down in the middle of thelake, and then he would never have to carry over any more.  Theman was hugely delighted, and told Hans that out of gratitude hewould take him once more across, and back again.  But Hans saidno, he would save him the trouble, he was quite satisfiedalready, and pursued his way.  Then he came to thecastle where the daughter was ill.  He took her on his shoulders,for she could not walk, and carried her down the cellar-steps andpulled out the toad's nest from beneath the lowest step and gaveit into her hand, and she sprang off his shoulder and up thesteps before him, and was quite cured.  Then were the father andmother beyond measure rejoiced, and they gave Hans gifts of goldand of silver, and whatsoever else he wished for, that theygave him.  And when he got to the other castle he went at onceinto the wood-house, and found the key under the log of woodbehind the door, and took it to the lord of the castle.  Hewas not a little pleased, and gave Hans as a reward much of thegold that was in the chest, and all kinds of things besides,such as cows, and sheep, and goats.  When Hans arrived beforethe king, with all these things - with the money, and the gold,and the silver and the cows, sheep and goats, the king askedhim how he had come by them.  Then Hans told him that thegriffin gave every one whatsoever he wanted.  So the king thoughthe himself could make use of such things, and set out on his wayto the griffin, but when he got to the lake, it happened thathe was the very first who arrived there after Hans, and the manput him down in the middle of it and went away, and the kingwas drowned.  Hans, however, married the daughter, and becameking.There were once a man and a woman who had an only child, andlived quite alone in a solitary valley.  It came to pass that themother once went into the wood to gather branches of fir, andtook with her little Hans, who was just two years old.  As itwas spring-time, and the child took pleasure in the many-coloredflowers, she went still further onwards with him into the forest.Suddenly two robbers sprang out of the thicket, seized the motherand child, and carried them far away into the black forest, whereno one ever came from one year's end to another.  The poor womanurgently begged the robbers to set her and her child free, buttheir hearts were made of stone, they would not listen to herprayers and entreaties, and drove her on farther by force.  Afterthey had worked their way through bushes and briars for abouttwo miles, they came to a rock where there was a door, at whichthe robbers knocked and it opened at once.  They had to go througha long dark passage, which burnt on the hearth.  On the wall hungswords, sabres, and other deadly weapons which gleamed in thelight, and in the midst stood a black table at which four otherrobbers were sitting gambling, and the captain sat at the head ofit.  As soon as he saw the woman he came and spoke to her, andtold her to be at ease and have no fear, they would do nothing tohurt her, but she must look after the housekeeping, and if shekept everything in order, she should not fare ill with them.Thereupon they gave her something to eat, and showed her a bedwhere she might sleep with her child.The woman stayed many years with the robbers, and Hans grewtall and strong.  His mother told him stories, and taught himto read an old book of tales about knights which she found inthe cave.  When Hans was nine years old, he made himself a strongclub out of a branch of fir, hid it behind the bed, and thenwent to his mother and said, dear mother, pray tell me who ismy father.  I must and will know.  His mother was silent andwould not tell him, that he might not become home-sick.  Moreovershe knew that the godless robbers would not let him go away, butit almost broke her heart that Hans should not go to his father.In the night, when the robbers came home from their robbingexpedition, Hans brought out his club, stood before the captain,and said, I now wish to know who my father is, and if you do nottell me at once I will strike you down.  Then the captain laughed,and gave Hans such a box on the ear that he rolled under the table.Hans got up again, held his tongue, and thought, I will waitanother year and then try again, perhaps I shall do better then.When the year was over, he brought out his club again, rubbed thedust off it, looked at it well, and said,it is a stout strong club.  At night the robbers came home,drank one jug of wine after another, and their heads began to beheavy.  Then Hans brought out his club, placed himself beforethe captain, and asked him who his father was.  But the captainagain gave him such a vigorous box on the ear that Hans rolledunder the table.  However, it was not long before he was up again,and so beat the captain and the robbers with his club, thatthey could no longer move either their arms or their legs.His mother stood in a corner full of admiration for his braveryand strength.  When Hans had done his work, he went to his mother,and said, now I have shown myself to be in earnest, but now Imust also know who my father is.  Dear Hans, answered themother, come, we will go and seek him until we find him.  Shetook from the captain the key to the entrance-door, and Hansfetched a great meal-sack and packed into it gold and silver, andwhatsoever else he could find that was beautiful, until it wasfull, and then he took it on his back.  They left the cave, buthow Hans did open his eyes when he came out of the darknessinto daylight, and saw the green forest, and the flowers, andthe birds, and the morning sun in the sky.  He stood there andwondered at everything just as if he were not quite right in thehead.  His mother looked for the way home, and when they hadwalked for a couple of hours, they got safely into their lonelyvalley and to their little house.  The father was sitting in thedoorway.  He wept for joy when he recognized his wife and heardthat Hans was his son, for he had long regarded them both asdead.  But Hans, although he was not twelve years old, was ahead taller than his father.  They went into the little roomtogether, but Hans had scarcely put his sack on the bench bythe stove, than the whole house began to crack - the bench brokedown and then the floor, and the heavy sack fell through intothe cellar.  God save us, cried the father, what's that.  Nowyou have broken our little house to pieces.  Don't let that turnyour hair grey, dear father, answered Hans.  There, in that sack,is more than is wanting for a new house.  The father and Hansat once began to build a new house, to buy cattle and land, andto keep a farm.  Hans ploughed the fields, andwhen he followed the plough and pushed it into the ground, thebullocks had scarcely any need to draw.The next spring, Hans said, keep all the money and have made forme a walking-stick that weighs a hundred-weight, that I maygo a-traveling.  When the stick was ready, he left his father'shouse, went forth, and came to a deep, dark forest.  There heheard something crunching and cracking, looked round, and sawa fir-tree which was wound round like a rope from the bottom tothe top, and when he looked upwards he saw a great fellow whohad laid hold of the tree and was twisting it like a willow-wand.Hullo, cried Hans, what are you doing up there.  The fellowreplied, I got some faggots together yesterday and am twistinga rope for them.  That is what I like, thought Hans, he has somestrength, and he called to him, leave that alone, and come withme.  The fellow came down, and he was taller by a whole head thanHans, and Hans was not little.  Your name is now fir-twister,said Hans to him.  Thereupon they went further and heard somethingknocking and hammering with such force that the ground shookat every stroke.  Shortly afterwards they came to a mighty rock,before which a giant was standing and striking great pieces ofit away with his fist.  When Hans asked what he was doing, heanswered, at night, when I want to sleep, bears, wolves, andother vermin of that kind come, which sniff and snuffle aboutme and won't let me rest, so I want to build myself a house andlay myself inside it, so that I may have some peace.  Oh indeed,thought Hans, I can make use of this one also, and said to him,leave your house-building alone, and go with me.  You shall becalled rock-splitter.  The man consented, and they all threeroamed through the forest, and wherever they went the wild beastswere terrified, and ran away from them.  In the evening theycame to an old deserted castle, went up into it, andlaid themselves down in the hall to sleep.  The next morning Hanswent into the garden.  It had run quite wild, and was full ofthorns and brambles.  And as he was thus walking round about,a wild boar rushed at him, he, however, gave it such a blowwith his club that it fell directly.  He took it on his shouldersand carried itin, and they put it on a spit, roasted it, and enjoyed themselves.Then they arranged that each day, in turn, two should go outhunting, and one should stay at home, and cook nine poundsof meat for each of them.  Fir-twister stayed at home the first,and Hans and rock-splitter went out hunting.  When fir-twisterwas busy cooking, a little shrivelled-up old mannikin came to himin the castle, and asked for some meat.  Be off, you sneakingimp, he answered, you need no meat.  But how astonished fir-twisterwas when the little insignificant dwarf sprang up at him, andbelabored him so with his fists that he could not defend himself,but fell on the ground and gasped for breath.  The dwarf didnot go away until he had thoroughly vented his anger on him.When the two others came home from hunting, fir-twister saidnothing to them of the old mannikin and of the blows which hehimself had received, and thought, when they stay at home, theymay just try their  chance with the little scrubbing-brush, andthe mere thought of that gave him pleasure already.The next day rock-splitter stayed at home, and he fared justas fir-twister had done, being very ill-treated by the dwarfbecause he was not willing to give him any meat.  When the otherscame home in the evening, fir-twister saw clearly what he hadsuffered, but both kept silence, and thought, Hans alsomust taste some of that soup.Hans, who had to stay at home the next day, did his work inthe kitchen as it had to be done, and as he was standingskimming the pan, the dwarf came and without more adodemanded a piece of meat.  Then Hans thought, he is a poorwretch, I will give him some of my share, that the others maynot run short, and handed him a bit.  When the dwarf haddevoured it, he again asked for some meat, and good-naturedHans gave it to him, and told him it was a handsome piece,and that he was to be content with it.  But the dwarf beggedagain for the third time.  You are shameless, said Hans, and gavehim none.  Then the malicious dwarf wanted to spring on him andtreat him as he had treated fir-twister and rock-splitter, buthe had chosen the wrong man.  Hans, withoutexerting himself much, gave him a couple of blows which madehim jump down the castle steps.  Hans was about to run after him,but fell right over, flat on his face.  When he rose up again,the dwarf had got the start of him.  Hans hurried after him as faras the forest, and saw him slip into a hole in the rock.  Hans nowwent home, but he had marked the spot.  When the two otherscame back, they were surprised that Hans was so well.  He toldthem what had happened, and then they no longer concealed howit had fared with them.  Hans laughed and said, it served youquite right.  Why were you so mean with your meat.  It is adisgrace that you who are so big should have let yourselves bebeaten by the dwarf.  Thereupon they took a basket and a rope,and all three went to the hole in the rock into which thedwarf had slipped, and let Hans and his clubdown in the basket.  When Hans had reached the bottom, he founda door, and when he opened it a maiden was sitting therewho was lovely as any picture, nay, so beautiful that no wordscan express it, and by her side sat the dwarf and grinned atHans like a sea-cat.  She, however, was bound with chains, andlooked so mournfully at him that Hans felt great pity for her,and thought to himself, you must deliver her out of the power ofthe wicked dwarf, and gave him such a blow with his club that hefell down dead.  Immediately the chains fell fromthe maiden, and Hans was enraptured with her beauty.  She toldhim she was a king's daughter whom a savage count had stolenaway from her home, and imprisoned there among the rocks,because she would have nothing to say to him.  The count, however,had set the dwarf as a watchman, and he had made her suffermisery and vexation enough.  And now Hans placed the maiden in thebasket and had her drawn up.  The basket came down again, butHans did not trust his two companions, and thought, they havealready shown themselves to be false, and told me nothing aboutthe dwarf.  Who knows what design they may have against me.  Sohe put his club in the basket, and it was lucky he did, for whenthe basket was half-way up, they let it fall again, and if Hanshad really been sitting in it he would have been killed.  Butnow he did not know how he was to work his way out of the depths,and when he turned it over and over in his mind he found nocounsel.  It is indeed sad, said he to himself, that I have towaste away down here, and as he was thus walking backwards andforwards, he once more came to the little chamber where the maidenhad been sitting, and saw that the dwarf had a ring on his fingerwhich shone and sparkled.  Then he drew it off and put it on, andwhen he turned it round on his finger, he suddenly heard somethingrustle over his head.  He looked up and saw spirits of the airhovering above, who told him he was their master, and askedwhat his desire might be.  Hans was at first struck dumb, butafterwards he said that they were to carry him up again.  Theyobeyed instantly, and it was just as if he had flown up himself.But when he had arrived there, he found no one in sight.Fir-twister and rock-splitterhad hurried away, and had taken the beautiful maiden with them.But Hans turned the ring, and the spirits of the air came andtold him that the two were on the sea.  Hans ran and ran withoutstopping, until he came to the sea-shore, and there far, far outon the water, he perceived a little boat in which his faithlesscomrades were sitting, and in fierce anger he leapt, withoutthinking what he was doing, club in hand into the water, andbegan to swim, but the club, which weighed a hundredweight,dragged him deep down until he was all but drowned.  Thenin the very nick of time he turned his ring, and immediatelythe spirits of the air came and bore him as swift as lightning intothe boat.  He swung his club and gave his wicked comrades thereward they merited and threw them into the water, and then hesailed with the beautiful maiden, who had been in the greatestalarm, and whom he delivered for the second time, home to herfather and mother, and married her, and all rejoiced exceedingly.A poor wood-cutter lived with his wife and three daughters ina little hut on the edge of a lonely forest.  One morning as hewas about to go to his work, he said to his wife, let oureldest daughter bring me my dinner into the forest, or I shallnever get my work done, and in order that she may not missher way, he added, I will take a bag of millet with me and strewthe seeds on the path.  When, therefore, the sun was just abovethe centre of the forest, the girl set out on her way with abowl of soup, but the field-sparrows, and wood-sparrows,larks and finches, blackbirds and siskins had picked up themillet long before, and the girl could not find the track.Trusting to chance, she went on and on, until the sun sank andnight began to fall.  The trees rustled in the darkness, theowls hooted, and she began to be afraid.  Then in the distance sheperceived a light which glimmered between the trees.  Thereought to be some people living there, who can take me in for thenight,thought she, and went up to the light.  It was not long beforeshe came to a house the windows of which were all lighted up.  Sheknocked, and a rough voice from inside cried, come in.  Thegirl stepped into the dark entrance, and knocked at the door ofthe room.  Just come in, cried the voice, and when she opened thedoor, an old gray-haired man was sitting at the table, supportinghis face with both hands, and his white beard fell down overthe table almost as far as the ground.  By the stove lay threeanimals, a hen, a cock, and a brindled cow.  The girl told herstory to the old man, and begged for shelter for the night.  Theman said,               my pretty hen,               my pretty cock,               my pretty brindled cow,               what are you saying now.Duks, answered the animals, and that must have meant, we arewilling, for the old man said, here you shall have shelterand food, go to the fire, and cook us our supper.  The girlfound in the kitchen abundance of everything, and cooked agood supper, but had no thought of the animals.  She carriedthe full bowl to the table, seated herself by the gray-haired man,ate and satisfied her hunger.  When she had had enough, she said,but now I am tired, where is there a bed in which I can lie down,and sleep.  The animals replied,               thou hast eaten with him,               thou hast drunk with him,               thou hast had no thought for us,               so find out for thyself where thou canst pass the               night.Then said the old man, just go upstairs, and you will find aroom with two beds, shake them up, and put white linen on them,and then I, too, will come and lie down to sleep.  The girlwent up, and when she had shaken the beds and put clean sheetson, she lay down in one of them without waiting any longer forthe old man.  After some time the gray-haired man came, held hiscandle over the girl and shook his head.  When he saw that shehad fallen into a sound sleep, he opened a trap-door, and let herdown into the cellar.Late at night, the wood-cutter came home, and reproached hiswife for leaving him to hunger all day.  It is not my fault,she replied, the girl went out with your dinner, and must havelost herself, but surely she will come back to-morrow.  Thewood-cutter, however, arose before dawn to go into the forest, andrequested that the second daughter should take him his dinnerthat day.  I will take a bag with lentils, said he, the seedsare larger than millet, the girl will see them better, andcan't lose her way.  At dinner-time, therefore, the girl tookout the food, but the lentils had disappeared.  The birds of theforest had picked them up as they had done the day before,and had left none.  The girl wandered about in the forestuntil night, and then she too reached the house of the old man,was told to go in, and begged for food and a bed.  The man withthe white beard again asked the animals,               my pretty hen,               my pretty cock,               my pretty brindled cow,               what are you saying now.The animals again replied 'duks, and everything happened justas it had happened the day before.  The girl cooked a good meal,ate and drank with the old man, and did not concern herself aboutthe animals, and when she inquired about her bed they answered,               thou hast eaten with him,               thou hast drunk with him,               thou hast had no thought for us,               so find out for thyself where thou canst pass               the night.When she was asleep the old man came, looked at her, shook hishead, and let her down into the cellar.On the third morning the wood-cutter said to his wife, send ouryoungest child out with my dinner to-day, she has always been goodand obedient, and will stay in the right path, and not rove aboutlike her sisters, the wild bumble-bees.  The mother did notwant to do it, and said, am I to lose my dearest child, as well.Have no fear, he replied, the girl will not go astray.  She istoo prudent and sensible.  Besides I will take some peas with me,strew them about.  They are still larger than lentils, and willshow her the way.  But when the girl went out with her basket onher arm, the wood-pigeons had already got all the peas in theircrops, and she did not know which way she was to turn.  She wasfull of sorrow and never ceased to think how hungry her fatherwould be, and how her good mother would grieve, if she didnot go home.  At length when it grew dark, she saw the light andcame to the house in the forest.  She begged quite prettily tobe allowed to spend the night there, and the man with the whitebeard again asked his animals,               my pretty hen,               my pretty cock,               my pretty brindled cow,               what are you saying now.Duks, said they.  Then the girl went to the stove where theanimals were lying, and petted the cock and hen, and strokedtheir smooth feathers with her hand, and caressed the brindledcow between her horns, and when, in obedience to the old man'sorders, she had made ready some good soup, and the bowl wasplaced upon the table, she said, am I to eat as much as I want,and the good animals to have nothing.  Outside is food in plenty,I will look after them first.  So she went and brought somebarley and stewed it for the cock and hen, and a whole armfulof sweet-smelling hay for the cow.  I hope you will like it,dear animals, said she, and you shall have a refreshing draughtin case you are thirsty.  Then she fetched a bucketful of water,and the cock and hen jumped on to the edge of it and dippedtheir beaks in, and then held up their heads as the birds do whenthey drink, and the brindled cow also took a hearty draught.  Whenthe animals were fed, the girl seated herself at the table bythe old man, and ate what he had left.  It was not long beforethe cock and the hen began to thrust their heads beneaththeir wings, and the eyes of the cow likewise began to blink.Then said the girl, ought we not to go to bed.               My pretty hen,               my pretty cock,               my pretty brindled cow,               what are you saying now.The animals answered, duks,               thou hast eaten with us,               thou hast drunk with us,               thou hast had kind thought for all of us,               we wish thee good-night.Then the maiden went upstairs, shook the feather-beds, and laidclean sheets on them, and when she had done it the old man cameand lay down in one of the beds, and his white beard reached downto his feet.  The girl lay down on the other, said her prayers,and fell asleep.
She slept quietly till midnight, and then there was such a noisein the house that she awoke.  There was a sound of cracking andsplitting in every corner, and the doors sprang open, and beatagainst the walls.  The beams groaned as if they were being tornout of their joints, it seemed as if the staircase were fallingdown, and at length there was a crash as if the entire roof hadfallen in.  When, however, all grew quiet once more, and the girlwas not hurt, she stayed quietly lying where she was, and fellasleep again.  But when she woke up in the morning with thebrilliancy of the sunshine, what did her eyes behold.  She waslying in a vast hall, and everything around her shone with royalsplendor.  On the walls, golden flowers grew up on a ground ofgreen silk, the bed was of ivory, and the canopy of red velvet,and on a chair close by, was a pair of slippers embroideredwith pearls.  The girl believed that she was in a dream, butthree richly clad attendants came in, and asked what orders shewould like to give.  If you will go, she replied, I will get upat once and make ready some soup for the old man, and then Iwill feed the pretty hen, and the pretty cock, and the prettybrindled cow.  She thought the old man was up already, and lookedround at his bed.  He, however, was not lying in it, but astranger.
And while she was looking at him, and becoming aware that he wasyoung and handsome, he awoke, sat up in bed, and said, I ama king's son, and was bewitched by a wicked witch, and made tolive in this forest, as an old gray-haired man.  No one wasallowed to be with me but my three attendants in the formof a cock, a hen, and a brindled cow.  The spell was not to bebroken until a girl came to us whose heart was so good that sheshowed herself full of love, not only towards mankind, but towardsanimals - and that you have done, and by you at midnight we wereset free, and the old hut in the forest was changed back againinto my royal palace.  And when they had arisen, the king's sonordered the three attendants to set out and fetch the father andmother of the girl to the marriage feast.  But where are my twosisters, inquired the maiden.  I have locked them in the cellar,and to-morrow they shall be led into the forest, and shall liveas servants to a charcoal-burner, until they have grown kinder,and do not leave poor animals to suffer hunger.There was once upon a time a very old woman, who lived with herflock of geese in a remote clearing in the mountains, and therehad a little house.  The clearing was surrounded by a large forest,and every morning the old woman took her crutch and hobbledinto it.  There, however, she was quite active, more so thanany one would have thought, considering her age, and collectedgrass for her geese, picked all the wild fruit she couldreach, and carried everything home on her back.  Anyone would havethought that the heavy load would have weighed her to the ground,but she always brought it safely home.  If anyone met her, shegreeted him quite courteously.  Good day, dear countryman, itis a fine day.  Ah, you wonder that I should drag grass about, buteveryone must take his burden on his back.  Nevertheless, peopledid not like to meet her if they could help it, and took bypreference a round-about way, and when a father with his boyspassed her, he whispered to them, beware of the old woman.  Shehas claws beneath her gloves.  She is a witch.One morning, a handsome young man was going through the forest.The sun shone bright, the birds sang, a cool breeze creptthrough the leaves, and he was full of joy and gladness.  Hehad as yet met no one, when he suddenly perceived the old witchkneeling on the ground cutting grass with a sickle.  She hadalready thrust a whole load into her bundle, and near it stoodtwo baskets, which were filled with wild apples and pears.  But,good little mother, said he, how can you carry all that away.  Imust carry it, dear sir, answered she, rich folk's childrenhave no need to do such things, but with the peasant folk thesaying goes, don't look behind you, you will only see how crookedyour back is.Will you help me, she said, as he remained standing by her.You have still a straight back and young legs, it would be atrifle to you.  Besides, my house is not so very far from here,it stands there on the heath behind the hill.  How soon youwould bound up thither.  The young man took compassion on theold woman.  My father is certainly no peasant, replied he, buta rich count.  Nevertheless, that you may see that it is not onlypeasants who can carry things, I will take your bundle.  Ifyou will try it, said she, I shall be very glad.  You willcertainly have to walk for an hour, but what will that matter toyou, only you must carry the apples and pears as well.  The youngman felt somewhat uneasy when he heard of an hour's walk, but theold woman would not let him off, packed the bundle on his back,and hung the two baskets on his arm.  See, it is quite light, saidshe.  No, it is not light, answered the count, and pulled a ruefulface.  Verily, the bundle weighs as heavily as if it were full ofcobblestones, and the apples and pears are as heavy as lead.  Ican scarcely breathe.  He had a mind to put everything downagain, but the old woman would not allow it.  Just look, saidshe mockingly, the young gentleman will not carry what I, an oldwoman, have so often dragged along.  You are ready with fine words,but when it comes to be earnest, you want to take to your heels.Why are you standing loitering there.  She continued, step out.No one will take the bundle off again.  As long as he walked onlevel ground, it was still bearable, but when they came to the hilland had to climb, and the stones rolled down under his feet as ifthey were alive, it was beyond his strength.  Drops of sweat stoodon his forehead, and ran, hot and cold, down his back.  Mother,said he, I can go no farther.  I want to rest a little.  Nothere, answered the old woman, when we have arrived at our journey'send, you can rest.  But now you must go forward.  Who knowswhat good it may do you.  Old woman, you are becoming shameless,said the count, and tried to throw off the bundle, but he laboredin vain.  It stuck as fast to his back as if it grew there.He turned and twisted, but he could not get rid of it.  The oldwoman laughed at this, and sprang about quite delighted onher crutch.  Don't get angry, dear sir, said she, you are growingasred in the face as a turkey-cock.  Carry your bundle patiently.I will give you a good present when we get home.What could he do.  He was obliged to submit to his fate, andcrawl along patiently behind the old woman.  She seemed to growmore and more nimble, and his burden still heavier.  Allat once she made a bound, jumped on to the bundle and seatedherself on the top of it.  And however withered she might be,she was yet heavier than the stoutest country lass.  Theyouth's knees trembled, but when he did not go on, the old womanhit him about the legs with a switch and with stinging-nettles.Groaning continually, he climbed the mountain, and at lengthreached the old woman's house, when he was just about to drop.When the geese perceived the old woman, they flapped their wings,stretched out their necks, ran to meet her, cackling all thewhile.  Behind the flock walked, stick in hand, an old wench,strong and big, but ugly as night.  Good mother, said she tothe old woman, has anything happened to you, you have stayedaway so long.  By no means, my dear daughter, answered she,I have met with nothing bad, but, on the contrary, with thiskind gentleman, who has carried my burden for me.  Only think,he even took me on his back when I wastired.  The way, too, has not seemed long to us.  We have beenmerry, and have been cracking jokes with each other all thetime.  At last the old woman slid down, took the bundle off theyoung man's back, and the baskets from his arm, looked at himquite kindly, and said, now seat yourself on the bench beforethe door, and rest.  You have fairly earned your wages, and theyshall not be wanting.  Then she said to the goose-girl, gointo the house, my dear daughter, it is not becoming for youto be alone with a young gentleman.  One must not pour oil on tothe fire, he might fall in love with you.  The count knew notwhether to laugh or to cry.  Such a sweetheart as that, thoughthe, could not touch my heart, even if she were thirty yearsyounger.  In the meantime the old woman strokedand fondled her geese as if they were children, and then wentinto the house with her daughter.  The youth lay down on thebench, under a wild apple-tree.  The air was warm and mild.  Onall sides stretched a green meadow, which was set with cowslips,wild thyme, and a thousand other flowers.  Through the midstof it rippled a clear brook on which the sun sparkled, andthe white geese went walking backwards and forwards, or paddled inthe water.  It is quite delightful here, said he, but I am sotired that I cannot keep my eyes open.  I will sleep a little.If only a gust of wind does not come and blow my legs off mybody, for they are as rotten as tinder.When he had slept a little while, the old woman came and shookhim till he awoke.  Sit up, said she, you can not stay here.  Ihave certainly treated you ill enough, still it has not cost youyour life.  Of money and land you have no need, here is somethingelse for you.  Thereupon she thrust a little box into his hand,which was cut out of a single emerald.  Take great care of it,said she, it will bring you good fortune.  The count sprang up,and as he felt that he was quite fresh, and had recovered hisvigor, he thanked the old woman for her present, and set offwithout even once looking back at the beautiful daughter.  Whenhe was already some way off, he still heard in the distance thenoisy cry of the geese.For three days the count had to wander in the wilderness beforehe could find his way out.  He then reached a large town, and asnoone knew him, he was led into the royal palace, where the kingand queen were sitting on their throne.  The count fell on oneknee, drew the emerald box out of his pocket, and laid it at thequeen's feet.  She bade him rise and hand her the little box.Hardly, however, had she opened it, and looked therein, than shefell as if dead to the ground.  The count was seized by the king'sservants, and was being led to prison, when the queen openedher eyes, and ordered them to release him, and every one was togo out, as she wished to speak with him in private.When the queen was alone, she began to weep bitterly, and said,of what use to me are the splendors and honors with which I amsurrounded.  Every morning I awake in pain and sorrow.  I hadthree daughters, the youngest of whom was so beautiful that thewhole world looked on her as a wonder.  She was as white as snow,as rosy as apple-blossom, and her hair as radiant as sun-beams.When she cried, not tears fell from her eyes, but pearls andjewels only.  When she was fifteen years old, the king summonedall three sisters to come before his throne.  You should have seenhow all the people gazed when the youngest entered, it was justas if the sun were rising.  Then the king spoke, my daughters,I know not when my last day may arrive.  I will to-day decide whateach shall receive at my death.  You all love me, but the oneof you who loves me best, shall fare the best.  Each of themsaid she loved him best.  Can you not express to me, said the king,how much you do love me, and thus I shall see what you mean.  Theeldest spoke, I love my father as dearly as the sweetest sugar.The second, I love my father as dearly as my prettiest dress.  Butthe youngest was silent.  Then the father said, and you,my dearest child, how much do you love me.  I do not know, andcan compare my love with nothing.  But her father insisted thatshe should name something.  So she said at last, the best fooddoes not please me without salt, therefore I love my fatherlike salt.  When the king heard that, he fell into a passion, andsaid, if you love me like salt, your love shall also be repaid youwith salt.  Then he divided the kingdom between the two elder,but caused a sack of salt to be bound on the back of theyoungest, and two servants had to lead her forth into thewild forest.  We all begged and prayed for her, said the queen,but the king's anger was not to be appeased.  How she criedwhen she had to leave us.  The whole road was strewn with thepearls which flowed from her eyes.  The king soon afterwardsrepented of his great severity, and had the whole forestsearched for the poor child, but no one could find her.  WhenI think that the wild beasts have devoured her, I know not howto contain myself for sorrow.  Many a time I console myselfwith the hope that she is still alive, and may have hidden herselfin a cave, or has found shelter with compassionate people.  Butpicture to yourself, when I opened your little emerald box, apearl lay therein, of exactly the same kind as those which usedto fall from my daughter's eyes.  And then you can also imaginehow the sight of it stirred my heart.  You must tell me how youcame by that pearl.  The count told her that he had received itfrom the old woman in the forest, who had appeared very strangeto him, and must be a witch, but he had neither seen nor heardanything of the queen's child.  The king and the queen resolvedto seek out the old woman.  They thought that there where thepearl had been, they would obtain news of their daughter.
The old woman was sitting in that lonely place at her spinning-wheelspinning.  It was already dusk, and a log which was burningon the hearth gave a scanty light.  All at once there was a noiseoutside, the geese were coming home from the pasture, and utteringtheir hoarse cries.  Soon afterwards the daughter also entered.But the old woman scarcely thanked her, and only shook herhead a little.  The daughter sat down beside her, took herspinning-wheel, and twisted the threads as nimbly as a young girl.Thus they both sat for two hours, and exchanged never a word.  Atlast something rustled at the window and two fiery eyes peeredin.  It was an old night-owl, which cried 'uhu, three times.  Theold woman looked up just a little, then she said, now, my littledaughter, it is time for you to go out and do your work.  She roseand went out, and where did she go.  Over the meadows ever onwardinto the valley.  At last she came to a well, with three oldoak-trees standing beside it.  Meanwhilethe moon had risen large and round over the mountain, andit was so light that one could have found a needle.  She removeda skin which covered her face, then bent down to the well, andbegan to wash herself.  When she had finished, she dipped theskin also in the water, and then laid it on the meadow, so thatit should bleach in the moonlight, and dry again.  But how themaiden was changed.  Such a change as that was never seen before.When the gray mask fell off, her golden hair broke forth likesun-beams, and spread about like a mantle over her whole form.Her eyes shone out as brightly as the stars in heaven, and hercheeks bloomed a soft red like apple-blossom.But the fair maiden was sad.  She sat down and wept bitterly.One tear after another forced itself out of her eyes, and rolledthrough her long hair to the ground.  There she sat, and wouldhave remained sitting a long time, if there had not been a rustlingand cracking in the boughs of the neighboring tree.  She sprangup like a roe which has been overtaken by the shot of the hunter.Just then the moon was obscured by a dark cloud, and in an instantthe maiden had put on the old skin and vanished, like a lightblown out by the wind.She ran back home, trembling like an aspen-leaf.  The old womanwas standing on the threshold, and the girl was about to relatewhat had befallen her, but the old woman laughed kindly, andsaid, I already know all.  She led her into the room and lighteda new log.  She did not, however, sit down to her spinning again,but fetched a broom and began to sweep and scour.  All must beclean and sweet, she said to the girl.  But, mother, said themaiden, why do you begin work at so late an hour.  What do youexpect.  Do you know then what time it is, asked the old woman.Not yet midnight, answered the maiden, but already past eleveno'clock.  Do you not remember, continued the old woman, thatit is three years to-day since you came to me.  Your time is up,we can no longer remain together.  The girl was terrified, andsaid, alas, dear mother, will you cast me off.  Where shall I go.I have no friends, and no home to which I can go.  I have alwaysdone as youbade me, and you have always been satisfied with me.  Do not sendme away.  The old woman would not tell the maiden what lay beforeher.  My stay here is over, she said to her, but when I depart,house and parlor must be clean.  Therefore do not hinder me inmy work.  Have no care for yourself, you shall find a roof toshelter you, and the wages which I will give you shall alsocontent you.  But tell me what is about to happen, the maidencontinued to entreat.  I tell you again, do not hinder me in mywork.  Do not say a word more, go to your chamber, take the skinoff your face, and put on the silken gown which you had on whenyou came to me, and then wait in your chamber until I call you.But I must once more tell of the king and queen, who hadjourneyed forth with the count in order to seek out the old womanin the wilderness.  The count had strayed away from them in thewood by night, and had to walk onwards alone.  Next day it seemedto him that he was on the right track.  He still went forward,until darkness came on, then he climbed a tree, intending topass the night there, for he feared that he might lose his way.When the moon illumined the surrounding country he perceived afigure coming down the mountain.  She had no stick in her hand,but yet he could see that it was the goose-girl, whom he hadseen before in the house of the old woman.  Oho, cried he, thereshe comes, and if I once get hold of one of the witches, theother shall not escape me.  But how astonished he was, whenshe went to the well, took off the skin and washed herself,when her golden hair fell down all about her, and she wasmore beautiful than anyone whom he had ever seen in the wholeworld.  He hardly dared to breathe, but stretched his head asfar forward through the leaves as he could, and stared at her.Either he bent over too far, or whatever the cause might be, thebough suddenly cracked, and that very moment the maiden slippedinto the skin, sprang away like a roe, and as the moon wassuddenly covered, disappeared from his sight.  Hardly had shedisappeared, before the count descended from the tree, andhastened after her with nimble steps.  He had not been gonelong before he saw, in the twilight, two figures coming overthe meadow.It was the king and queen, who had perceived from a distance thelight shining in the old woman's little house, and were goingto it.  The count told them what wonderful things he had seenby the well, and they did not doubt that it had been their lostdaughter.  They walked onwards full of joy, and soon came to thelittle house.  The geese were sitting all round it, and hadthrust their heads under their wings and were sleeping, and notone of them moved.  The king and queen looked in at the window,where the old woman was sitting quite quietly spinning, noddingher head and never looking round.  The room was perfectly clean,as if the little mist men, who carry no dust on their feet, livedthere.  Their daughter, however, they did not see.  They gazed atall this for a long time, until at last they took heart, andknocked softly at the window.  The old woman appeared to havebeen expecting them.  She rose, and called out quite kindly,come in.  I know you already.  When they had entered the room,the old woman said, you might have spared yourself the longwalk, if you had not three years ago unjustly driven awayyour child, who is so good and lovable.  No harm has come to her.For three years she has had to tend the geese.  With them she haslearnt no evil, but has preserved her purity of heart.  You,however, have been sufficiently punished by the misery in whichyou have lived.  Then she went to the chamber and called, comeout, my little daughter.  Thereupon the door opened, and theprincess stepped out in her silken garments, with her goldenhair and her shining eyes, and it was as if an angel from heavenhad entered.She went up to her father and mother, fell on their necks andkissed them.  There was no help for it, they all had to weep forjoy.  The young count stood near them, and when she perceived himshe became as red in the face as a moss-rose, she herself didnot know why.  The king said, my dear child, I have given awaymy kingdom, what shall I give you.  She needs nothing, saidthe old woman.  I give her the tears that she has wept on youraccount.  They are precious pearls, finer than those that arefound in the sea, and worth more than your whole kingdom, and Igive her my littlehouse as payment for her services.  When the old woman had saidthat, she disappeared from their sight.  The walls rattled alittle, and when the king and queen looked round, the littlehouse had changed into a splendid palace, a royal table had beenspread, and the servants were running hither and thither.The story goes still further, but my grandmother, who relatedit to me, had partly lost her memory, and had forgotten the rest.I shall always believe that the beautiful princess married thecount, and that they remained together in the palace, andlived there in all happiness so long as God willed it.  Whetherthe snow-white geese, which were kept near the little hut, wereverily young maidens no one need take offence, whom the oldwoman had taken under her protection, and whether they nowreceived their human form again, and stayed as handmaids to theyoung queen, I do not exactly know, but I suspect it.  Thismuch is certain, that the old woman was no witch, as peoplethought, but a wise woman, who meant well.  Very likely it wasshe who, at the princess's birth, gave her the gift of weepingpearls instead of tears.  That does not happen nowadays, or elsethe poor would soon become rich.When adam and eve were driven out of paradise, they werecompelled to build a house for themselves on barren ground, andeat their bread in the sweat of their brow.  Adam dug up the land,and eve spun.  Every year eve brought a child into the world, butthe children were unlike each other, some pretty, and some ugly.After a considerable time had gone by, God sent an angel to them,to announce that he was coming to inspect their household.  Eve,delighted that the lord should be so gracious, cleaned herhouse diligently, decked it with flowers, andstrewed rushes on the floor.  Then she brought in her children,but only the beautiful ones.  She washed and bathed them, combedtheir hair, put clean raiment on them, and cautioned them toconduct themselves decorously and modestly in the presence of theLord.  They were to bow down before him civilly, hold out theirhands, and to answer his questions modestly and sensibly.  Theugly children, however, were not to let themselves be seen.  Onehid himself beneath the hay, another under the roof, a thirdin the straw, the fourth in the stove, the fifth in the cellar,the sixth under a tub, the seventh beneath the wine-cask, theeighth under an old fur cloak, the ninth and tenth beneath thecloth out of which she always made their clothes, and theeleventh and twelfth under the leather out of which she cuttheir shoes.  She had scarcely got ready, before there was aknock at the house-door.  Adam looked through a chink, and sawthat it was the Lord.  Adam opened the door respectfully,and the heavenly father entered.  There, in a row, stood thepretty children, and bowed before him, held out their hands,and knelt down.  The Lord, however, began to bless them, laidhis hands on the first, and said, thou shalt be a powerful king,and to the second, thou a prince, to the third, thou acount, to the fourth, thou a knight, to the fifth, thoua nobleman, to the sixth, thou a burgher, to the seventh, thoua merchant, to the eighth, thou a learned man.  He bestowedupon them also all his richest blessings.  When eve saw thatthe Lord was so mild and gracious, she thought, I will bringhither my ill-favored children also, it may be that he willbestow his blessing on them likewise.So she ran and brought them out of the hay, the straw, thestove, and wherever else she had concealed them.  Then came thewhole coarse, dirty, scabby, sooty band.  The Lord smiled,looked at them all, and said, I will bless these also.  He laidhis hands on the first, and said to him, thou shalt be a peasant,to the second, thou a fisherman, to the third,thou a smith, to the fourth, thou a tanner, to the fifth, thoua weaver, to the sixth, thou a shoemaker, to the seventh, thoua tailor, to the eighth, thou a potter, to the ninth, thou awaggoner, to the tenth, thou a sailor, to the eleventh, thoua messenger, to the twelfth, thou a scullion all the days ofthy life.When eve had heard all this she said, Lord, how unequally thoudividest thy gifts.  After all they are all of them my children,whom I have brought into the world, thy favors should be givento all alike.  But God answered, eve, thou dost not understand.It is right and necessary that the entire world should besupplied from thy children.  If they were all princes and lords,who would grow corn, thresh it, grind and bake it.  Who wouldbe blacksmiths, weavers, carpenters, masons, laborers, tailorsand seamstresses.  Each shall have his own place, so that oneshall support the other, and all shall be fed like the limbs ofone body.  Then eve answered, ah, Lord, forgive me, I was tooquick in speaking to thee.  Have thy divine will with my children.There was once upon a time a miller who lived with his wifein great contentment.  They had money and land, and theirprosperity increased year by year more and more.  But illluck comes like a thief in the night.  As their wealth hadincreased so did it again decrease, year by year, and at lastthe miller couldhardly call the mill in which he lived, his own.  He was in greatdistress, and when he lay down after his day's work, found norest, but tossed about in his bed, sorely troubled.  Onemorning he rose before daybreak and went out into the open air,thinking that perhaps there his heart might become lighter.  Ashe was stepping over the mill-dam the first sunbeam was justbreaking forth, and he heard a rippling sound in the pond.  Heturned round and perceived a beautiful woman, rising slowly outof the water.  Her long hair, which she was holding off hershoulders with her soft hands, fell down on both sides,and covered her white body.  He soon saw that she was thenixie of the mill-pond, and in his fright did not know whetherhe should run away or stay where he was.  But the nixie made hersweet voice heard, called him by his name, and asked him why hewas so sad.  The miller was at first struck dumb, but when he heardher speak so kindly, he took heart, and told her how he hadformerly lived in wealth and happiness, but that now he was sopoor that he did not know what to do.  Be easy, answered the nixie,I will make you richer and happier than you have ever beenbefore, only you must promise to give me the young thing whichhas just been born in your house.  What else can that be, thoughtthe miller, but a puppy or a kitten, and he promised her what shedesired.  The nixie descended into the water again, and hehurried back to his mill, consoled and in good spirits.  He hadnot yet reached it, when the maid-servant came out of the houseand cried to him to rejoice, for his wife had given birth toa little boy.  The miller stood as if struck by lightning.  Hesaw very well that the cunning nixie had been aware of it, and hadcheated him.  Hanging his head, he went up to his wife's bedsideand when she said, why do you not rejoice over the fine boy, hetold her what had befallen him, and what kind of a promise he hadgiven to the nixie.  Of what use to me are riches and prosperity,he added, if I am to lose my child.  But what can I do.  Even therelatives, who had come thither to wish them joy, did not knowwhat to say.  In the meantime prosperity again returned to themiller's house.  All that he undertook succeeded.  It was asif presses and coffers filled themselvesof their own accord, and as if money multiplied nightly in thecupboards.  It was not long before his wealth was greater thanit had ever been before.  But he could not rejoice over ituntroubled, for the bargain which he had made with the nixietormented his soul.  Whenever he passed the mill-pond, he fearedshe might ascend and remind him of his debt.  He never let theboy himself go near the water.  Beware, he said to him, if youdo but touch the water, a hand will rise, seize you, and draw youdown.  But as year after year went by and the nixie did not showherself again, the miller began to feel at ease.  The boy grewup to be a youth and was apprenticed to a huntsman.  When he hadlearnt everything, and had become an excellent huntsman, thelord of the village took him into his service.  In the villagelived a beautiful and true-hearted maiden, who pleased thehuntsman, and when his master perceived that, he gave him alittle house, the two were married, lived peacefully andhappily, and loved each other with all their hearts.One day the huntsman was chasing a roe.  And when the animalturned aside from the forest into the open country, he pursuedit and at last shot it.  He did not notice that he was now inthe neighborhood of the dangerous mill-pond, and went, afterhe had disembowelled the roe, to the water, in order to washhis blood-stained hands.  Scarcely, however, had he dippedthem in than the nixie ascended, smilingly wound her drippingarms around him, and drew him quickly down under the waves,which closed over him.  When it was evening, and the huntsmandid not return home, his wife became alarmed.  She went out toseek him, and as he had often told her that he had to be onhis guard against the snares of the nixie, and dared not ventureinto the neighborhood of the mill-pond, she already suspectedwhat had happened.  She hastened to the water, andwhen she found his hunting-pouch lying on the shore, she couldno longer have any doubt of the misfortune.  Lamenting hersorrow, and wringing her hands, she called on her belovedby name, but in vain.  She hurried across to the other sideof the pond, and called him anew.  She reviled the nixie withharsh words, but no answer greeted her.  The surface of the waterremained calm, only the crescent moon stared steadily back ather.  The poor woman did not leave the pond.  With hasty steps,she paced round and round it, without resting a moment, sometimesin silence, sometimes uttering a loud cry, sometimes sobbingsoftly.  At last her strength came to an end, she sank downto the ground and fell into a heavy sleep.  Presently a dreamtook possession of her.She was anxiously climbing upwards between great masses ofrock.  Thorns and briars caught her feet, the rain beat in herface, and the wind tossed her long hair about.  When she hadreached the summit, quite a different sight presented itselfto her.  The sky was blue, the air soft, the ground slopedgently downwards, and on a green meadow, gay with flowers ofevery color, stood a pretty cottage.  She went up to it andopened the door.  There sat an old womanwith white hair, who beckoned to her kindly.  At that verymoment, the poor woman awoke, day had already dawned, and sheat once resolved to act in accordance with her dream.  Shelaboriously climbed the mountain.  Everything was exactly as shehad seen it in the night.  The old woman received her kindly,and pointed out a chair on which she might sit.  You must havemet with a misfortune, she said, since you have sought out mylonely cottage.  With tears, the woman related what had befallenher.  Be comforted, said the old woman, I will help you.  Hereis a golden comb for you.  Tarry till the full moon has risen,then go to the mill-pond, seat yourself on the shore, andcomb your long black hair with this comb.  When you have done,lay it down on the bank, and you will see what will happen.  Thewoman returned home, but the time till the full moon came, passedslowly.  When at last the shining disc appeared in the heavens,she went out to the mill-pond, sat down and combed her long blackhair with the golden comb, and when she had finished, she laidit down at the water's edge.  It was not long before therewas a movement in the depths, a wave rose, rolled to the shore,and bore the comb away with it.  In not more than the timenecessary for the comb to sink to the bottom, the surface ofthe water parted, and the head of the huntsman arose.  He didnot speak, but looked at his wife with sorrowful glances.At the same instant, a second wave came rushing up, and coveredthe man's head.  All had vanished, the mill-pond lay peaceful asbefore, and nothing but the face of the full moon shone on it.Full of sorrow, the woman went back, but again the dream showedher the cottage of the old woman.  Next morning she again setout and complained of her woes to the wise woman.  The oldwoman gave her a golden flute, and said, tarry till the fullmoon comes again, then take this flute.  Play a beautiful airon it, and when you have finished, lay it on the sand.  Thenyou will see what will happen.  The wife did as the old womantold her.  No sooner was the flute lying on the sand than therewas a stirring in the depths, and a wave rushed up and borethe flute away with it.  Immediately afterwards the waterparted, and not only the head of the man, buthalf of his body also arose.  He stretched out his armslongingly towards her, but a second wave came up, covered him,and drew him down again.  Alas, what does it help me, said theunhappy woman, that I should see my beloved, only to lose himagain.  Despair filled her heart anew, but the dream led hera third time to the house of the old woman.  She set out, andthe wise woman gave her a golden spinning-wheel, consoled her andsaid, all is not yet fulfilled, tarry until the time of the fullmoon, then take the spinning-wheel, seat yourself on the shore,and spin the spool full, and when you have done that, place thespinning-wheel near the water, and you will see what will happen.The woman obeyed all she said exactly.  As soon as the full moonshowed itself, she carried the golden spinning-wheel to theshore, and span industriously until the flax came to an end, andthe spool was quite filled with the threads.  No sooner was thewheel standing on the shore than there was a more violent movementthan before in the depths of the pond, and a mighty wave rushedup, and bore the wheel away with it.  Immediately the head andthe whole body of the man rose into the air, in a water-spout.He quickly sprang to the shore, caught his wife by the hand andfled.  But they had scarcely gone a very little distance,when the whole pond rose with a frightful roar, and streamedout over the open country.  The fugitives already saw deathbefore their eyes, when the woman in her terror implored thehelp of the old woman, and in an instant they were transformed,she into a toad, he into a frog.  The flood which had overtakenthem could not destroy them, but it tore them apart and carriedthem far away.When the water had dispersed and they both touched dry land again,they regained their human form, but neither knew where the otherwas.  They found themselves among strange people, who did notknow their native land.  High mountains and deep valleys laybetween them.  In order to keep themselves alive, they wereboth obliged to tend sheep.  For many long years they drovetheir flocks through field and forest and were full of sorrowand longing.When spring had once more broken forth on the earth, they bothwent out one day with their flocks, and as chance would have it,they drew near each other.  They met in a valley, but did notrecognize each other.  Yet they rejoiced that they were nolonger so lonely.  Henceforth they each day drove their flocksto the same place.  They did not speak much, but they feltcomforted.  One evening when the full moon was shining in thesky, and the sheep were already at rest, the shepherd pulledthe flute out of his pocket, and played on it a beautiful butsorrowful air.  When he had finished he saw that the shepherdesswas weeping bitterly.  Why are you weeping, he asked.  Alas,answered she, thus shone the full moon when I played this airon the flute for the last time, and the head of my belovedrose out of the water.  He looked at her, and it seemed as if aveil fell from his eyes, and he recognized his dear wife, andwhen she looked at him, and the moon shone in his face sheknew him also.  They embraced and kissed each other, and no oneneed ask if they were happy.There was once a poor shepherd-boy whose father and motherwere dead, and he was placed by the authorities in the houseof a rich man, who was to feed him and bring him up.  The man andhis wife, however, had bad hearts, and were greedy and jealous oftheir riches, and vexed whenever anyone put a morsel of theirbread in his mouth.  The poor young fellow might do what heliked, he got little to eat, but only so many blows the more.One day he had to watch a hen and her chickens, but she escapedthrough a hedge with them, and a hawk darted down instantly,and carried her off through the air.  The boy called, thief,thief, rascal, with all the strength of his body.  But what gooddid that do.  The hawk did not bring its prey back again.  Theman heard the noise, and ran to the spot, and as soon as hesaw that his hen was gone, he fell in a rage, and gave the boysuch a beating that he could not stir for two days.  Then hehad to take care of the chickens without the hen, but now hisdifficulty was greater, for one ran here and the other there.He thought he was doing a very wise thing when he tied themall together with a string, because then the hawk would notbe able to steal any of them away from him.  But he was verymuch mistaken.  After two days, worn out with running about andhunger, he fell asleep.  The bird of prey came, and seized oneof the chickens, and as the others were tied fast to it, itcarried them all off together, perched itself on a tree, anddevoured them.  The farmer was just coming home, and when he sawthe misfortune, he got angry and beat the boy so unmercifullythat he was forced to lie in bed for several days.When he was on his legs again, the farmer said to him, you aretoo stupid for me, I cannot make a herdsman of you, you mustgo as errand-boy.  Then he sent him to the judge, to whom hewas to carry a basketful of grapes, and he gave him a letter aswell.  On the way hunger and thirst tormented the unhappy boyso violently that he ate two grapes.  He took the basket to thejudge, but when the judge had read the letter, and counted thegrapes he said, two are missing.  The boy confessed quite honestlythat, driven by hunger and thirst, he had devoured the two whichwere missing.  The judge wrote a letter to the farmer, and askedfor the same number of grapes again.  These also the boy hadto take to him with a letter.  As he again was so extremelyhungry and thirsty, he could not help it, and again ate two grapes.But first he took the letter out of the basket, put it under astone and seated himself thereon in order that the letter mightnot see and betray him.  The judge, however, again made him givean explanation about the missing grapes.  Ah, said the boy,how have you learnt that.  The letter could not know about it,for I put it under a stone before I did it.  The judge couldnot help laughing at the boy's simplicity, and sent the man aletter wherein he cautioned him to look after the poor boy better,and not let him want for meat and drink, and also that he was toteach him what was right and what was wrong.I will soon show you the difference, said the hard man, ifyou will eat, you must work, and if you do anything wrong, youshall be quite sufficiently taught by blows.The next day he set him a hard task.  He was to chop two bundlesof hay for food for the horses, and then the man threatened, infive hours, said he, I shall be back again, and if the hayis not chopped by that time, I will beat you until you can notmove a limb.  Thefarmer went with his wife, the man-servant and the girl, to theyearly fair, and left nothing behind for the boy but a small bitof bread.  The boy seated himself on the bench, and began towork with all his might.  As he got warm over it he put his littlecoat off and threw it on the hay.  In his terror lest he shouldnot get done in time he kept constantly cutting, and in hishaste, without noticing it, he chopped his little coat as well asthe hay.  He became aware of the misfortune too late.  There wasno repairing it.  Ah, cried he, now all is over with me.  Thewicked man did not threaten me for nothing.  If he comes backand sees what I have done, he will kill me.  Rather than that Iwill take my own life.The boy had once heard the farmer's wife say, I have a potwith poison in it under my bed.  She, however, had only saidthat to keep away greedy people, for there was honey in it.The boy crept under the bed, brought out the pot, and ate allthat was in it.  I do not know, said he, folks say death isbitter, but it tastes very sweet to me.  It is no wonderthat the farmer's wife has so often longed for death.  He seatedhimself in a little chair, and was prepared to die.  But insteadof becoming weaker he felt himself strengthened by the nourishingfood.  It cannot have been poison, thought he, but thefarmer once said there was a small bottle of poison for flies inthe closet in which he keeps his clothes.  That, no doubt, willbe the true poison, and bring death to me.  It was, however, nopoison for flies, but hungarian wine.  The boy got out the bottle,and emptied it.  This death tastes sweet too, said he, but shortlyafter when the wine began to mount into his brain and stupefyhim, he thought his end was drawing near.  I feel that I must die,said he, I will go away to the churchyard, and seek a grave.  Hestaggered out, reached the churchyard, and laid himself in a newlydug grave.  He lost his senses more and more.  In the neighborhoodwas an inn where a wedding was being held.  When he heard themusic, he fancied he was already in paradise, until at lengthhe lost all consciousness.  The poor boy never awoke again.  Theheat of the strong wine and the cold night-dew deprived him oflife, and he remained in the grave in which he had laid himself.When the farmer heard the news of the boy's death he was terrified,and afraid of being brought to justice - indeed, his distress tooksuch a powerful hold of him that he fell fainting to the ground.His wife, who was standing by the hearth with a pan of hot fat,ran to him to help him.  But the flames enveloped the pan, thewhole house caught fire, in a few hours it lay in ashes, andthe rest of the years they had to live they passed in povertyand misery, tormented by the pangs of conscience.There was once upon a time a girl who was young and beautiful, butshe had lost her mother when she was quite a child, and herstep-mother did all she could to make the girl's life wretched.Whenever this woman gave her anything to do, she worked at itindefatigably, and did everything that lay in herpower.  Still she could not touch the heart of the wicked woman,she was never satisfied, it was never enough.  The harder the girlworked, the more work was put upon her, and all that the womanthought of was how to weigh her down with still heavier burdens,and make her life still more miserable.One day she said to her, here are twelve pounds of feathers whichyou must pick, and if they are not done this evening, you mayexpect a good beating.  Do you imagine you are to idle away thewhole day.  The poor girl sat down to the work, but tears randown her cheeks as she did so, for she saw plainly enough that itwas quite impossible to finish the work in one day.  Whenever shehad a little heap of feathers lying before her, and she sighed orsmote her hands together in her anguish, they flew away, and shehad to pick them up again, and begin her work anew. Then she puther elbows on the table, laid her face in her two hands, and cried,is there no one, then, on God's earth to have pity on me.  Thenshe heard a low voice which said, be comforted, my child, I havecome to help you.  The maiden looked up, and an old woman was byher side.  She took the girl kindly by the hand, and said, onlytell me what is troubling you.  As she spoke so kindly, the girltold her of her miserable life, and how one burden after anotherwas laid upon her, and she never could get to the end of the workwhich was given to her.  If I have not done these feathers by thisevening, my step-mother will beat me, she has threatened she will,and I know she keeps her word.  Her tears began to flow again, butthe good old woman said, do not be afraid, my child, rest a while,and in the meantime I will look to your work.  The girl laydown on her bed, and soon fell asleep.  The old woman seatedherself at the table with the feathers, and how they did fly offthe quills, which she scarcely touched with her withered hands.The twelve pounds were soon finished, and when the girl awoke,great snow-white heaps were lying, piled up, and everything inthe room was neatly cleared away, but the old woman hadvanished.  The maiden thanked God, and sat still till eveningcame, when the step-mother came in and marveled to see the workcompleted.  Just look, youawkward creature, said she, what can be done when people areindustrious, and why could you not set about something else.There you sit with your hands crossed.  When she went out shesaid, the creature is worth more than her salt.  I must give hersome work that is still harder.Next morning she called the girl, and said there is a spoon foryou.  With that you must empty out the great pond which isbeside the garden, and if it is not done by night, you know whatwill happen.  The girl took the spoon, and saw that it was fullof holes, but even if it had not been, she never could haveemptied the pond with it.  She set to work at once, knelt downby the water, into which her tears were falling, and began toempty it.  But the good old woman appeared again, and when shelearnt the cause of her grief, she said, be of good cheer, mychild.  Go into the thicket and lie down and sleep, I will soondo your work.  As soon as the old woman was alone, she barelytouched the pond, and a vapor rose up on high from the water, andmingled itself with the clouds.  Gradually the pond was emptied,and when the maiden awoke before sunset and came thither, she sawnothing but the fishes which were struggling in the mud.  Shewent to her step-mother, and showed her that the work was done.It ought to have been done long before this, said she, and grewwhite with anger, but she meditated something new.On the third morning she said to the girl, you must build me acastle on the plain there, and it must be ready by theevening.  The maiden was dismayed, and said, how can I completesuch a great work.  I will endure no opposition, screamed thestep-mother.  If you can empty a pond with a spoon that is full ofholes, you can build a castle too.  I will take possession ofit this very day, and if anything is wanting, even if it be themost trifling thing in the kitchen or cellar, you know what liesbefore you.  She drove the girl out, and when she entered thevalley, the rocks were there, piled up one above the other, andall her strength would not have enabled her even to move the verysmallest of them.  She sat down and wept, and still she hoped theold woman would help her.  The old woman was not long in coming,she comforted her and said, lie downthere in the shade and sleep, and I will soon build the castle foryou.  If it would be a pleasure to you, you can live in ityourself.  When the maiden had gone away, the old woman touched thegray rocks.  They began to rise, moved together and stood there asif giants had built the walls, and on these the building aroseand it seemed as if countless hands were working invisibly, andplacing one stone upon another.  There was a dull heavy noise fromthe ground, pillars arose of their own accord on high, andplaced themselves in order near each other.  The tiles laidthemselves in order on the roof, and when noon-day came, thegreat weather-cock was already turning itself on the summit of thetower, like a golden maid with fluttering garments.  The insideof the castle was being finished while evening was drawing near.How the old woman managed it, I know not, but the walls of therooms were hung with silk and velvet, embroidered chairs werethere, and richly ornamented arm-chairs by marble tables,crystal chandeliers hung down from the ceilings, and mirroredthemselves in the smooth floor, green parrots were there in giltcages, and so were strange birds which sang most beautifully, andthere was on all sides as much magnificence as if a king weregoing to live there.  The sun was just setting when the girlawoke, and the brightness of a thousand lights flashed in herface.  She hurried to the castle, and entered by the open door.The steps were spread with red cloth, and the goldenbalustrade beset with flowering trees.  When she saw thesplendor of the rooms, she stood as if turned to stone.  Whoknows how long she might have stood there if she had notremembered the step-mother.  Alas, she said to herself, if shecould but be satisfied at last, and would give up making my lifea misery to me.  The girl went and told her that the castle wasready.  I will move into it at once, said she, and rose from herseat.  When they entered the castle, she was forced to hold herhand before her eyes, the brilliancy of everything was sodazzling.  You see, said she to the girl, how easy it has beenfor you to do this, I ought to have given you something harder.She went through all the rooms, and examined every corner tosee if anything was wanting or defective, but she coulddiscover nothing.  Now we will go down below, said she, lookingat the girl with malicious eyes.  The kitchen and the cellarstill have to be examined and if you have forgotten anything youshall not escape your punishment.  But the fire was burning onthe hearth, and the meat was cooking in the pans, the tongs andshovel were leaning against the wall, and the shining brazenutensils all arranged in sight.  Nothing was missing, not evena coal-box and a water-pail.  Which is the way to the cellar,she cried.  If that is not abundantly filled with wine casksit shall go ill with you.  She herself raised up the trap-doorand descended, but she had hardly made two steps before theheavy trap-door which was only laid back, fell down.  The girlheard a scream, lifted up the door very quickly to go to heraid, but she had fallen down, and the girl found her lyinglifeless at the bottom.And now the magnificent castle belonged to the girl alone.  Sheat first did not know how to reconcile herself to her goodfortune.  Beautiful dresses were hanging in the wardrobes, thechests were filled with gold and silver, or with pearls andjewels, and she never felt a desire that she was not able togratify.  And soon the fame of the beauty and riches of themaiden went over all the world.  Wooers presented themselvesdaily but none pleased her.  At length the son of the king cameand he knew how to touch her heart, and she betrothed herselfto him.  In the garden of the castle was a lime-tree, underwhich they were one day sitting together, when he said to her,I will go home and obtain my father's consent to our marriage.I entreat you to wait for me under this lime-tree, I shall beback with you in a few hours.  The maiden kissed him on hisleft cheek, and said, keep true to me, and never let any one elsekiss you on this cheek.  I will wait here under the lime-treeuntil you return.The maid stayed beneath the lime-tree until sunset, but he didnot return.  She sat three days from morning till evening,waiting for him, but in vain.  As he still was not there by thefourth day, she said, some accident has assuredly befallen him.I will go out and seek him, and will not come back until I havefound him.She packed up three of her most beautiful dresses, one embroideredwith bright stars, the second with silver moons, the third withgolden suns, tied up a handful of jewels in her handkerchief,and set out.  She inquired everywhere for her betrothed, but noone had seen him, no one knew anything about him.  Far and widedid she wander through the world, but she found him not.  Atlast she hired herself to a farmer as a cowherd, and buried herdresses and jewels beneath a stone.And now she lived as a herdswoman, guarded her herd, and wasvery sad and full of longing for her beloved.  She had a littlecalf which she taught to know her, and fed it out of her ownhand, and when she said,     little calf, little calf, kneel by my side,     and do not forget your cowherd-maid,     as the prince forgot his betrothed bride,     who waited for him 'neath the lime-tree's shade.The little calf knelt down, and she stroked it.And when she had lived for a couple of years alone and full ofgrief, a report was spread over all the land that the king'sdaughter was about to celebrate her marriage.  The road to thetown passed through the village where the maiden was living, andit came to pass that once when the maiden was driving out herherd, the bridegroom traveled by.  He was sitting proudly on hishorse, and never looked round, but when she saw him she recognizedher beloved, and it was just as if a sharp knife had pierced herheart.  Alas, said she, I believed him true to me, but he hasforgotten me.Next day he again came along the road.  When he was near hershe said to the little calf,     little calf, little calf, kneel by my side,     and do not forget your cowherd-maid,     as the prince forgot his betrothed bride,     who waited for him 'neath the lime-tree's shade.When he was aware of the voice, he looked down and reined inhis horse.  He looked into the girl's face and then put his handsbefore his eyes as if he were trying to remember something, but hesoon rode onwards and was out of sight.  Alas, said she, he nolonger knows me.  And her grief was ever greater.Soon after this a great festival three days long was to be held atthe king's court, and the whole country was invited to it.Now will I try my last chance, thought the maiden, and whenevening came she went to the stone under which she had buried hertreasures.  She took out the dress with the golden suns, put it on,and adorned herself with the jewels.  She let down her hair, whichshe had concealed under a handkerchief, and it fell down in longcurls about her, and thus she went into the town, and in thedarkness was observed by no one.  When she entered the brightlylighted hall, every one started back in amazement, but no one knewwho she was.  The king's son went to meet her, but he did notrecognize her.  He led her out to dance, and was so enchanted withher beauty, that he thought no more of the other bride.  When thefeast was over, she vanished in the crowd, and hastened beforedaybreak to the village, where she once more put on her herd'sdress.Next evening she took out the dress with the silver moons, andput a half-moon made of precious stones in her hair.  When sheappeared at the festival, all eyes were turned upon her, but theking's son hastened to meet her, and filled with love for her,danced with her alone, and no longer so much as glanced at anyoneelse.  Before she went away she was forced to promise him tocome again to the festival on the last evening.When she appeared for the third time, she wore the star-dresswhich sparkled at every step she took, and her hair-ribbon andgirdle were starred with jewels.  The prince had already beenwaiting for her for a long time, and forced his way up to her.Do but tell who you are, said he, I feel just as if I had alreadyknown you a long time.  Do you not know what I did when you leftme.  Then she stepped up to him, and kissed him on his left cheek,and in a moment it was as if scales fell from his eyes, and herecognized the true bride.  Come, said he to her, here I stay nolonger, gave her his hamd, and led her down to the carriage.  Thehorses hurriedaway to the magic castle as if the wind had been harnessed to thecarriage.  The illuminated windows already shone in the distance.When they drove past the lime-tree, countless glow-worms wereswarming about it.  It shook its branches, and sent forth theirfragrance.  On the steps flowers were blooming, and the roomechoed with the song of strange birds, but in the hall the entirecourt was assembled, and the priest was waiting to marry thebridegroom and the true bride.There was once a girl whose father and mother died whileshe was still a little child.  All alone, in a small house at theend of the village, dwelt her godmother, who supported herselfby spinning, weaving, and sewing.  The old woman took theforlorn child to live with her, kept her to her work, and educatedher in all that is good.  When the girl was fifteen years old,the old woman became ill, called the child to her bedside,and said, dear daughter, I feel my end drawing near.  I leave youthe little house, which will protect you from wind and weather, andmy spindle, shuttle, and needle, with which you can earn yourbread.  Then she laid her hands on the girl's head, blessed her,and said, only preserve the love of God in your heart, and all willgo well with you.  Thereupon she closed her eyes, and when she waslaid in the earth, the maiden followed the coffin, weepingbitterly, and paid her the last mark of respect.And now the maiden lived quite alone in the little house, andwas industrious, and spun, wove, and sewed, and the blessing of thegood old woman was on all that she did.  It seemed as if the flaxin the room increased of its own accord, and whenever she wove apiece of cloth or carpet, or had made a shirt, she at once founda buyer who paid her amply for it, so that she was in want ofnothing, and even had something to share with others.About this time, the son of the king was traveling about thecountry looking for a bride.  He was not to choose a poor one, anddid not want to have a rich one.  So he said, she shall be my wifewho is the poorest, and at the same time the richest.  When he cameto the village where the maiden dwelt, he inquired, as he didwherever he went, who was the richest and also the poorest girl inthe place.  They first named the richest.  The poorest, they said,was the girl who lived in the small house quite at the end of thevillage.  The rich girl was sitting in all her splendor before thedoor of her house, and when the prince approached her, she got up,went to meet him, and made him a low curtsy.  He looked at her,said nothing, and rode on.  When he came to the house of the poorgirl, she was not standing at the door, but sitting in her littleroom.  He stopped his horse, and saw through the window, on whichthe bright sun was shining, the girl sitting at her spinning-wheel,busily spinning.  She looked up, and when she saw that the princewas looking in, she blushed all over her face, let her eyes fall,and went on spinning.  I do not know whether, just at thatmoment, the thread was quite even, but she went on spinning untilthe king's son had ridden away again.  Then she went to thewindow, opened it, and said, it is so warm in this room, and shelooked after him as long as she could distinguish the whitefeathers in his hat.  Then she sat down to work again in her roomand went on with her spinning, and a saying which the old womanhad often repeated when she wassitting at her work, came into her mind, and she sang thesewords to herself,     spindle, my spindle, haste, haste thee away,     and here to my house bring the wooer, I pray.And what do you think happened.  The spindle sprang out of herhand in an instant, and out of the door, and when, in herastonishment, she got up and looked after it, she saw that it wasdancing out merrily into the open country, and drawing a shininggold thread after it.  Before long, it had entirely vanished fromher sight.  As she had now no spindle, the girl took the weaver'sshuttle in her hand, sat down to her loom, and began to weave.The spindle, however, danced continually onwards, and just asthe thread came to an end, reached the prince.  What do I see, hecried, the spindle certainly wants to show me the way, turnedhis horse about, and rode back with the golden thread.  The girlhowever, was sitting at her work singing,     shuttle, my shuttle, weave well this day,     and guide the wooer to me, I pray.Immediately the shuttle sprang out of her hand and out by the door.Before the threshold, however, it began to weave a carpet whichwas more beautiful than the eyes of man had ever yet beheld.Lilies and roses blossomed on both sides of it, and on a goldenground in the center green branches ascended, under which boundedhares and rabbits, stags and deer stretched their heads inbetween them, brightly-colored birds were sitting in the branchesabove, they lacked nothing but the gift of song.  The shuttleleapt hither and thither, and everything seemed to grow ofits own accord.As the shuttle had run away, the girl sat down to sew.  She heldthe needle in her hand and sang,     needle, my needle, sharp-pointed and fine,     prepare for the wooer this house of mine.Then the needle leapt out of her fingers, and flew everywhereabout the room as quick as lightning.  It was just as ifinvisible spirits were working, it covered tables and bencheswith green cloth in an instant,and the chairs with velvet, and hung the windows with silkencurtains.  Hardly had the needle put in the last stitch than themaiden saw through the window the white feathers of the prince,whom the spindle had brought thither by the golden thread.  Healighted, stepped over the carpet into the house, and when heentered the room, there stood the maiden in her poor garments, butshe shone out from within them like a rose surrounded by leaves.You are the poorest and also the richest, said he to her.  Comewith me, you shall be my bride.  She did not speak, but she gavehim her hand.  Then he gave her a kiss, led her forth, lifted heron to his horse, and took her to the royal castle, where thewedding was solemnized with great rejoicings.  The spindle,shuttle, and needle were preserved in the treasure-chamber,and held in great honor.There was once upon a time a princess, who, high under thebattlements in her castle, had an apartment with twelve windows,which looked out in every possible direction, and when she climbedup to it and looked around her, she could inspect her whole kingdom.When she looked out of the first, her sight was more keen than thatof any other human being, from the second she could see stillbetter, from the third more distinctly still, and so it went on,until the twelfth, from which she saw everything above the earthand under the earth, and nothing at all could bekept secret from her.  Moreover, as she was haughty, and would besubject to no one, but wished to keep the dominion for herselfalone, she caused it to be proclaimed that no one should ever beher husband who could not conceal himself from her so effectively,that it should be quite impossible for her to find him.  He whotried this, however, and was discovered by her, was to have hishead struck off, and stuck on a post.  Ninety-seven posts with theheads of dead men were already standing before the castle, and noone had come forward for a long time.  The princess was delighted,and thought to herself, now I shall be free as long as I live.Then three brothers appeared before her, and announced to herthat they were desirous of trying their luck.  The eldest believedhe would be quite safe if he crept into a lime-pit, but she sawhim from the first window, made him come out, and had his headcut off.  The second crept into the cellar of the palace, but sheperceived him also from the first window, and his fate was sealed.His head was placed on the nine and ninetieth post.  Then theyoungest came to her and entreated her to give him a day forconsideration, and also to be so gracious as to overlook it if sheshould happen to discover him twice, but if he failed the thirdtime, he would look on his life as over.  As he was so handsome,and begged so earnestly, she said, yes, I will grant you that, butyou will not succeed.Next day he meditated for a long time how he should hidehimself, but all in vain.  Then he seized his gun and went outhunting.  He saw a raven, took a good aim at him, and was justgoing to fire, when the bird cried, don't shoot, I will rewardyou.  He put his gun down, went on, and came to a lake where hesurprised a large fish which had come up from the depths belowto the surface of the water.  When he had aimed at it, the fishcried, don't shoot, and I will reward you.  He allowed it to divedown again, went onwards, and met a fox which was lame.  Hefired and missed it, and the fox cried, you had much better comehere and draw the thorn out of my foot for me.  He did this, butwhen he wanted to kill the fox and skin it, the fox said, stop,and I will reward you.  The youth let him go, and then as itwas evening, returned home.Next day he was to hide himself, but no matter how he puzzledhis brains over it, he did not know where.  He went into theforest to the raven and said, I let you live on, so now tell mewhere I am to hide myself, so that the king's daughter will notsee me.  The raven hung his head and thought it over for a longtime.  At length he croaked, I have it.  He fetched an egg out ofhis nest, cut it into two parts, and shut the youth inside it,then made it whole again, and seated himself on it.  When theking's daughter went to the first window she could not discoverhim, nor could she from the others, and she began to be uneasy,but from the eleventh she saw him.  She ordered the raven to beshot, and the egg to be brought and broken, and the youth wasforced to come out.  She said, for once you are excused, but ifyou do not better than this, you are lost.  Next day he went tothe lake, called the fish to him and said, I suffered you to live,now tell me where to hide myself so that the king's daughtermay not see me.  The fish thought for a while, and at lastcried, I have it, I will shut you up in my stomach.  Heswallowed him, and went down to the bottom of the lake.  Theking's daughter looked through her windows, and even from theeleventh did not see him, and was alarmed, but at length fromthe twelfth she saw him.  She ordered the fish to be caught andkilled, and then the youth appeared.  It is easy to imagine thestate of mind he was in.  She said, twice you are forgiven, butbe sure that your head will be set on the hundredth post.On the last day, he went with a heavy heart into the country, andmet the fox.  You know how to find all kinds of hiding-places,said he, I let you live, now advise me where I shall hide myselfso thatthe king's daughter shall not discover me.  That's a hard task,answered the fox, looking very thoughtful.  At length he cried,I have it, and went with him to a spring, dipped himself in it,and came out as a stall-keeper in the market, and dealer inanimals.  The youth had to dip himself in the water also, andwas changed into a small sea-hare.  The merchant went into thetown, and showed the pretty little animal, and many personsgathered together to see it.  At length the king's daughtercame likewise, and as she liked it very much, she bought it,and gave the merchant a good deal of money for it.  Before hegave it over to her, he said to it, when the king's daughter goesto the window, creep quickly under the braids of her her hair.And now the time arrived when she was to search for him.  Shewent to one window after another in turn, from the first to theeleventh, and did not see him.  When she did not see him from thetwelfth either, she was full of anxiety and anger, and shut itdown with such violence that the glass in every window shiveredinto a thousand pieces, and the whole castle shook.She went back and felt the sea-hare beneath the braids of herhair.  Then she seized it, and threw it on the ground exclaiming,away with you, get out of my sight.  It ran to the merchant, andboth of them hurried to the spring, wherein they plunged, andreceived back their true forms.  The youth thanked the fox, andsaid, the raven and the fish are idiots compared with you, youknow the right tune to play, there is no denying that.The youth went straight to the palace.  The princess was alreadyexpecting him, and abandoned herself to her fate.  The weddingwas solemnized, and now he was king, and lord of all the kingdom.He never told her where he had concealed himself for the thirdtime, and who had helped him, so she believed that he had doneeverything by his own skill, and she had a great respect for him,for she thought to herself, he is able to do more than I.One day an old man and his wife were sitting in front of amiserable house resting a while from their work.  Suddenlya splendid carriage with four black horses came driving up,and a richly-dressed man descended from it.  The peasant stoodup, went to the great man, and asked what he wanted, and in whatway he could serve him.  The stranger stretched out his hand tothe old man, and said, I want nothing but to enjoy for once acountry dish, cook me some potatoes, in the way you always havethem, and then I will sit down at your table and eat them withpleasure.  The peasant smiled and said, you are a count or aprince, or perhaps even a duke, noble gentlemen often have suchfancies, but you shall have your wish.  The wife then went intothe kitchen and began to wash and rub the potatoes, and to makethem into balls, as they are eaten by the country-folks.  Whilstshe was busy with this work, the peasant said to the stranger,come into my garden with me for a while, I have still somethingto do there.  He had dug some holes in the garden, and nowwanted to plant trees in them.  Have you no children, asked thestranger, who could help you with your work.  No, answered thepeasant, I had a son, it is true, but it is long since he wentout into the world.  He was a ne'er-do-well, clever and knowing,but he would learn nothing and was full of bad tricks.  At lasthe ran away from me, and since then I have heard nothing of him.The old man took a young tree, put it in a hole, drove in a postbeside it, and when he had shovelled in some earth and hadtrampled it firmly down, he tied the stem of the tree above,below, and in the middle, fast to the post by a rope of straw.But tell me,said the stranger, why you don't tie that crooked knotted tree,which is lying in the corner there, bent down almost to the ground,to a post also that it may grow straight, as well as these.  Theold man smiled and said, sir, you speak according to your knowledge,it is easy to see that you are not familiar with gardening.  Thattree there is old, and mis-shapen, no one can make it straight now.Trees must be trained while they are young.  That is how it waswith your son, said the stranger, if you had trained him whilehe was still young, he would not have run away.  Now he too musthave grown hard and mis-shapen.  Truly it is a long time since hewent away, replied the old man, he must have changed.  Would youknow him again if he were to come to you, asked the stranger.Hardly by his face, replied the peasant, but he has a mark abouthim, a birth-mark on his shoulder, that looks like a bean.  Whenhe had said that the stranger pulled off his coat, bared hisshoulder, and showed the peasant the bean.  Good God, cried theold man, you are really my son, and love for his child stirredin his heart.  But, he added, how can you be my son, you havebecome a great lord and live in wealth and luxury.  How have youcontrived to do that.  Ah, father, answered the son, the youngtree was bound to no post and has grown crooked.  Now it is tooold, it will never be straight again.  How have I come by all this.I have become a thief, but do not be alarmed, I am a master-thief.For me there are neither locks nor bolts, whatsoever I desire ismine.  Do not imagine that I steal like a common thief, I onlytake some of the superfluity of the rich.  Poor people are safe,I would rather give to them than take anything from them.  It isthe same with anything which I can have without trouble, cunning,and dexterity - I never touch it.  Alas, my son, said the father,it still does not please me, a thief is still a thief, I tell youit will end badly.  He took him to his mother, and when she heardthat was her son, she wept for joy, but when he told her that hehad become a master-thief, two streams flowed down over herface.  At length she said, even if he has become a thief, he isstill my son, and my eyes have beheld him once more.They sat down to table, and once again he ate with his parentsthe wretched food which he had not eaten for so long.  The fathersaid, if our lord, the count up there in the castle, learns whoyou are, and what trade you follow, he will not take you in hisarms and cradle you in them as he did when he held you at the font,but will cause you to swing from a halter.  Be easy, father, hewill do me no harm, for I understand my trade.  I will go to himmyself this very day.  When evening drew near, the master-thiefseated himself in his carriage, and drove to the castle.  Thecount received him civilly, for he took him for a distinguishedman.  When, however, the stranger made himself known, the countturned pale and was quite silent for some time.  At length hesaid, you are my godson, and on that account mercy shall takethe place of justice, and I will deal leniently with you.  Sinceyou pride yourself on being a master-thief, I will put your artto the proof, but if you do not stand the test, you must marrythe rope-maker's daughter, and the croaking of the raven must beyour music on the occasion.  Lord count, answered themaster-thief, think of three things, as difficult as you like,and if I do not perform your tasks, do with me what you will.The count reflected for some minutes, and then said, well, then,in the first place, you shall steal the horse I keep for my ownriding, out of the stable.  In the next, you shall steal thesheet from beneath the bodies of my wife and myself when we areasleep, without our observing it, and the wedding-ring of my wifeas well.  Thirdly and lastly, you shall steal away out of thechurch, the parson and clerk.  Mark what I am saying, foryour life depends on it.The master-thief went to the nearest town, there he bought theclothes of an old peasant woman, and put them on.  Then he stainedhis face brown, and painted wrinkles on it as well, so that no onecould have recognized him.  Then he filled a small cask with oldhungary wine in which was mixed a powerful sleeping-drink.  Heput the cask in a basket, which he took on his back, and walkedwith slow and tottering steps to the count's castle.  It wasalready dark when he arrived.  He sat down on a stone in thecourt-yard and began to cough, like an asthmatic old woman, and torub his hands as if he were cold.  In front of the door of thestable some soldiers werelying round a fire, one of them observed the woman, and called outto her, come nearer, old mother, and warm yourself beside us.After all, you have no bed for the night, and must take one whereyou can find it.  The old woman tottered up to them, begged themto lift the basket from her back, and sat down beside them at thefire.  What have you got in your little cask, old hag, asked one.A good mouthful of wine, she answered.  I live by trade, formoney and fair words I am quite ready to let you have a glass.Let us have it here, then, said the soldier, and when he hadtasted one glass he said, when wine is good, I like another glass,and had another poured out for himself, and the rest followed hisexample.  Hallo, comrades, cried one of them to those who were inthe stable, here is an old girl who has wine that is as old asherself, take a draught, it will warm your stomachs far betterthan our fire.  The old woman carried her cask into the stable.One of the soldiers had seated himself on the saddled riding-horse,another held its bridle in his hand, a third had laid hold ofits tail.  She poured out as much as they wanted until the springran dry.  It was not long before the bridle fell from the hand ofthe one, and he fell down and began to snore, the other left holdof the tail, lay down and snored still louder.  The one who wassitting in the saddle, did remain sitting, but bent his head downalmost to the horse's neck, and slept and blew with his mouth likethe bellows of a forge.  The soldiers outside had already beenasleep for a long time, and were lying on the ground motionless,as if dead.  When the master-thief saw that he had succeeded, hegave the first a rope in his hand instead of the bridle, and theother who had been holding the tail, a wisp of straw, but what washe to do with the one who was sitting on the horse's back.  Hedid not want to throw him down, for he might have awakened andhave uttered a cry.  He had a good idea, he unbuckled the girthsof the saddle, tied a couple of ropes which were hanging to a ringon the wall fast to the saddle, and drew the sleeping rider upinto the air on it, then he twisted the rope round the posts, andmade it fast.  He soon unloosed the horse from the chain, but ifhe had ridden over the stony pavement of the yard they would haveheard the noise in the castle.  So he wrapped the horse's hoofs inold rags, led him carefully out, leapt upon him, andgalloped off.When day broke, the master galloped to the castle on the stolenhorse.  The count had just got up, and was looking out of thewindow.  Good morning, sir count, he cried to him, here is thehorse, which I have got safely out of the stable.  Just look, howbeautifully your soldiers are lying there sleeping, and if you willbut go into the stable, you will see how comfortable yourwatchers have made it for themselves.  The count could not helplaughing.  Then he said, for once you have succeeded, but thingswon't go so well the second time, and I warn you that if you comebefore me as a thief, I will handle you as I would a thief.When the countess went to bed that night, she closed her handwith the wedding-ring tightly together, and the count said, allthe doors are locked and bolted, I will keep awake and wait forthe thief, but if he gets in by the window, I will shoot him.The master-thief, however, went in the dark to the gallows, cut apoor sinner who was hanging there down from the halter, andcarried him on his back to the castle.  Then he set a ladder upto the bedroom, put the dead body on his shoulders, and began toclimb up.  When he had got so high that the head of the dead manshowed at the window, the count, who was watching in his bed,fired a pistol at him, and immediately the master let the poorsinner fall down, descended the ladder, and hid himself in onecorner.  The night was sufficiently lighted by the moon, for themaster to see distinctly how the count got out of the window on tothe ladder, came down, carried the dead body into the garden, andbegan to dig a hole in which to lay it.  Now, thought the thief,the favorable moment has come, stole nimbly out of his corner, andclimbed up the ladder straight into the countess's bedroom.  Dearwife, he began in the count's voice, the thief is dead, but, afterall, he is my godson, and has been more of a scape-grace than avillain.  I will not put him to open shame, besides, I am sorryfor the parents.  I will bury him myself before daybreak in thegarden, that the thing may not be known.  So give me the sheet,I will wrap up the body in it, and not bury him like a dog.  Thecountess gave him the sheet.  I tell you what, continued thethief, I have a fit of magnanimity, give me the ring too, - theunhappy man risked his life for it, so he may take it with himinto his grave.  She would not gainsay the count, and althoughshe did it unwillingly she drew the ring from her finger, andgave it to him.  The thief made off with both these things, andreached home safely before the count in the garden had finishedhis work of burying.What a long face the count did pull when the master came nextmorning, and brought him the sheet and the ring.  Are you awizard, said he, who has fetched you out of the grave in whichI myself laid you, and brought you to life again.  You did notbury me, said the thief, but the poor sinner on the gallows,and he told him exactly how everything had happened, and the countwas forced to own to him that he was a clever, crafty thief.But you have not reached the end yet, he added, you have still toperform the third task, and if you do not succeed in that, all isof no use.  The master smiled and returned no answer.When night had fallen he went with a long sack on his back, abundle under his arms, and a lantern in his hand to the villagechurch.  In the sack he had some crabs, and in the bundle shortwax-candles.  He sat down in the churchyard, took out a crab, andstuck a  wax-candle on his back.  Then he lighted the little light,put the crab on the ground, and let it creep about.  He took asecond out of the sack, and treated it in the same way, and so onuntil the last was out of the sack.  Hereupon he put on a longblack garment that looked like a monk's cowl, and stuck a graybeard on his chin.  When at last he was quite unrecognizable, hetook the sack in which the crabs had been, went into the church,and ascended the pulpit.  The clock in the tower was just strikingtwelve, when the last stroke had sounded, he cried with a loudand piercing voice, hearken, sinful men, the end of all thingshas come.  The last day is at hand.  Hearken.  Hearken.Whosoever wishes to go to heaven with me must creep into the sack.I am peter, who opens and shuts the gate of heaven.  Behold howthe dead outside there in the chuchyard are wandering aboutcollecting their bones.  Come, come, and creep into the sack, theworld is about to be destroyed.  The cry echoed through the wholevillage.  The parson and clerk who lived nearest to the church,heard it first, and when they saw the lights which were movingabout the churchyard, they observed that something unusual wasgoing on, and went into the church.  They listened to the sermonfor a while, and then the clerk nudged the parson and said, itwould not be amiss if we were to use the opportunity together, andbefore the dawning of the last day, find an easy way of gettingto heaven.  To tell the truth, answered the parson, that is what Imyself have been thinking, so if you are inclined, we will set outon our way.  Yes, answered the clerk, but you, the pastor, havethe precedence, I will follow.  So the parson went first, andascended the pulpit where the master opened hissack.  The parson crept in first, and then the clerk.  The masterimmediately tied up the sack tightly, seized it by the middle, anddragged it down the pulpit-steps, and whenever the heads of thetwo fools bumped against the steps, he cried, we are going overthe mountains.  Then he drew them through the village in the sameway, and when they were passing through puddles, he cried, nowwe are going through wet clouds.  And when at last he was draggingthem up the steps of the castle, he cried, now we are on thesteps of heaven, and will soon be in the outer court.  When he hadgot to the top, he pushed the sack into the pigeon-house, and whenthe pigeons fluttered about, he said, hark how glad the angels are,and how they are flapping their wings.  Then he bolted the doorupon them, and went away.Next morning he went to the count, and told him that he hadperformed the third task also, and had carried the parson and clerkout of the church.  Where have you left them, asked the Lord.They are lying upstairs in a sack in the pigeon-house, andimagine that they are in heaven.  The count went up himself, andconvinced himself that the master had told the truth.  When he haddelivered the parson and clerk from their captivity, he said, youare an arch-thief, and have won your wager.  For once you escapewith a whole skin, but see that you leave my land, for if ever youset foot on it again, you may count on your elevation to thegallows.  The arch-thief took leave of his parents, once morewent forth into the wide world, and no one has ever heard ofhim since.A young drummer went out quite alone one evening into the country,and came to a lake on the shore of which he perceived lying therethree pieces of white linen.  What fine linen, said he, and put onepiece in his pocket.  He returned home, thought no more of what hehad found, and went to bed.  Just as he was going to sleep, itseemed to him as if someone was calling his name.  He listened,and was aware of a soft voice which cried to him, drummer, drummer,wake up.  As it was a dark night he could see no one, but itappeared to him that a figure was hovering about his bed.  Whatdo you want, he asked.  Give me back my shift, answered the voice,that you took away from me last evening by the lake.  You shall haveit back again, said the drummer, if you will tell me who you are.Ah, replied the voice, I am the daughter of a mighty king.  But Ihave fallen into the power of a witch, and am shut up on theglass-mountain.  I have to bathe in the lake every day with mytwo sisters, but I cannot fly back again without my shift.  Mysisters have gone away, but I have been forced to stay behind.  Ientreat you to give me my shift back.  Don't worry, poor child,said the drummer.  I will willingly give it back to you.  He tookit out of his pocket, and reached it to her in the dark.  Shesnatched it in haste, and wanted to go away with it.  Stop amoment, perhaps I can help you.  You can only help me by ascendingthe glass-mountain, and indeed if you were quite close to it youcould not ascend it.  When I want to do a thing I always can doit, said the drummer.  I am sorry for you, and have no fear ofanything.  But I do not know the way which leads to theglass-mountain.  The road goes through the greatforest, in which the man-eaters live, she answered, and more thanthat, I dare not tell you.  And then he heard her wings as she flewaway.By daybreak the drummer arose, buckled on his drums, and wentwithout fear straight into the forest.  After he had walked fora while without seeing any giants, he thought to himself, Imust waken up the sluggards, and he hung his drum before him,and beat such a roll that the birds flew out of the trees withloud cries.  It was not long before a giant who had been lyingsleeping among the grass, rose up, and was as tall as a fir-tree.Wretch, cried he, what are you drumming here for, and wakeningme out of my best sleep.  I am drumming, he replied, becauseI want to show the way to many thousands who are following me.What do they want in my forest, demanded the giant.  They wantto put an end to you, and cleanse the forest of such a monsteras you.  Oho.  Said the giant, I will trample you all to deathlike so many ants.  Do you think you can do anything against us,said the drummer, if you stoop to take hold of one, he will jumpaway and hide himself.  But when you are lying down and sleeping,they will come forth from every thicket, and creep up to you.Every one of them has a hammer of steel in his belt, and withthat they will beat in your skull.  The giant grew angry andthought, if I meddle with the crafty folk, it might turn outbadly for me.  I can strangle wolves and bears, but I cannotprotect myself from these earth-worms.  Listen, little fellow,said he, go back again, and I will promise you that for thefuture I will leave you and your comrades in peace, and if thereis anything else you wish for, tell me, for I am quite willingto do something to please you.  You have long legs, saidthe drummer, and can run quicker than I.  Carry me to theglass-mountain, and I will give my followers a signal to goback, and they shall leave you in peace this time.  Come here,worm, said the giant.  Seat yourself on my shoulder, I will carryyou where you wish to be.  The giant lifted him up, and thedrummer began to beat his drum up aloft to his heart's delight.The giant thought, that is the signal for the other people toturn back.After a while, a second giant was standing in the road, who tookthe drummer from the first, and stuck him in his button-hole.The drummer laid hold of the button, which was as large as adish, held on by it, and looked merrily around.  Then they cameto a third giant, who took him out of the button-hole, and sethim on the rim of his hat.  Up there the drummer walked backwardsand forwards, and looked over the trees, and when he perceiveda mountain in the blue distance, he thought, that must be theglass-mountain, and so it was.  The giant only made two moresteps, and they reached the foot of the mountain, where thegiant put him down.  The drummer demanded to be put on thesummit of the glass-mountain, but the giant shook his head,growled something in his beard, and went back into the forest.And now the poor drummer was standing before the mountain, whichwas as high as if three mountains were piled on each other, andat the same time as smooth as a looking-glass, and did not knowhow to get up it.  He began to climb, but that was useless, forhe always slipped back again.  If one was a bird now, thoughthe.  But what was the good of wishing, no wings grew for him.Whilst he was standing thus, not knowing what to do, he saw, notfar from him, two men who were struggling fiercely together.  Hewent up to them and saw that they were disputing about a saddlewhich was lying on the ground before them, and which both of themwanted to have.  What fools you are, said he, to quarrel abouta saddle, when you have not a horse for it.  The saddle isworth fighting about, answered one of the men.  Whosoeversits on it, and wishes himself in any place, even if it shouldbe the very end of the earth, gets there the instant he has utteredthe wish.  The saddle belongs to us in common.  It is my turnto ride on it, but that other man will not let me do it.  Iwill soon decide the quarrel, said the drummer, and he wentto a short distance and stuck a white rod in the ground.  Thenhe came back and said, now run to the goal, and whoever getsthere first, shall ride first.  Both set out at a trot, buthardly had they gone a couple of steps before the drummer swunghimself on the saddle, wished himself on the glass-mountainand before any one could turn round, he was there.  On thetop of the mountain was a plain.  There stood an old stone house,and in front of the house lay a great fish-pond, but behind it wasa dark forest.  He saw neither men nor animals, everything wasquiet.  Only the wind rustled amongst the trees, and the cloudsmoved by quite close above his head.  He went to the door andknocked.  When he had knocked for the third time, an old womanwith a brown face and red eyes opened the door.  She hadspectacles on her long nose, and looked sharply at him.  Thenshe asked what he wanted.  Entrance, food, and a bed for thenight, replied the drummer.  That you shall have, said the oldwoman, if you will perform three services in return.  Why not,he answered, I am not afraid of any kind of work, however, hardit may be.  The old woman let him go in, and gave him some foodand a good bed at night.  The next morning when he had slepthis fill, she took a thimble from her wrinkled finger, reachedit to the drummer, and said, go to work now, and empty out thepond with this thimble.  But you must have done it before night,and must have sought out all the fishes which are in the waterand laid them side by side, according to their kind and size.That is strange work, said the drummer, but he went to the pond,and began to empty it.  He baled the whole morning.  But whatcan anyone do to a great lake with a thimble, even if he wereto bale for a thousand years.When it was noon, he thought, it is all useless, and whether Iwork or not it will come to the same thing.  So he gave it upand sat down.  Then came a maiden out of the house who set alittle basket with food before him, and said, what ails you,that you sit so sadly here.  He looked at her, and saw thatshe was wondrously beautiful.  Ah, said he, I cannot finishthe first piece of work, how will it be with the others.  Icame forth to seek a king's daughter who is said to dwell here,but I have not found her, and I will go farther.  Stay here,said the maiden, I will help you out of your difficulty.  Youare tired, lay your head in my lap, and sleep.  When you awakeagain, your work will be done.  The drummer did notneed to be told that twice.  As soon as his eyes were shut,she turned a wishing-ring and said, rise, water.  Fishes, come out.Instantly the water rose on high like a white mist, and movedaway with the other clouds, and the fishes sprang on the shoreand laid themselves side by side each according to his size andkind.  When the drummer awoke, he saw with amazement that allwas done.  But the maiden said, one of the fish is not lyingwith those of its own kind, but quite alone.  When the oldwoman comes to-night and sees that all she demanded has beendone, she will ask you, what is this fish lying alone for.Then throw the fish in her face, and say, this one shall befor you, old witch.  In the evening the witch came, and whenshe had put this question, he threw the fish in her face.  Shebehaved as if she did not notice it, and said nothing, butlooked at him with malicious eyes.  Next morning she said,yesterday it was too easy for you, I must give you harder work.To-day you must hew down the whole of the forest, split the woodinto logs, and pile them up, and everything must be finishedby the evening.  She gave him an axe, a mallet, and two wedges.But the axe was made of lead, and the mallet and wedges were oftin.  When he began to cut, the edge of the axe was blunted,and the mallet and wedges were beaten out of shape.  He didnot know how to manage, but at mid-day the maiden came once morewith his dinner and comforted him.  Lay your head on my lap,said she, and sleep.  When you awake, your work will be done.She turned her wishing-ring, and in an instant the whole forestfell down with a crash, the wood split, and arranged itselfin heaps, and it seemed just as if unseen giants were finishingthe work.  When he awoke, the maiden said, do you see that thewood is piled up and arranged, one bough alone remains.  Butwhen the old woman comes this evening and asks you about thatbough, give her a blow with it, and say, that is for you,you witch.The old woman came, there you see how easy the work was,said she.  But for whom have you left that bough.  For you,you witch, he replied, and gave her a blow with it.  But shepretended not to feel it, laughed scornfully, and said, earlyto-morrow morning you shall arrange all the wood in one heap,set fire to it, and burn it.  He rose at break of day, and beganto pick up the wood, but how can a single man get a whole foresttogether.  The work made no progress.  The maiden, however,did not desert him in his need.  She brought him his food atnoon, and when he had eaten, he laid his head on her lap, andwent to sleep.  When he awoke, the entire pile of wood wasburning in one enormous flame, which stretched its tonguesout into the sky.  Listen to me, said the maiden, when the witchcomes, she will give you all kinds of orders.  Do whatever sheasks you without fear, and then she will not be able to get thebetter of you, but if you are afraid, the fire will lay holdof you, and consume you.  At last when you have done everything,seize her with both your hands, and throw her into the midstof the fire.  The maiden departed, and the old woman camesneaking up to him.  Oh, I am cold, said she, but that is a firethat burns.  It warms my old bones, and does me good.  But Isee a log lying there which won't burn, bring it out for me.When you have done that, you are free, and may go where youlike.  Now, jump in.The drummer did not reflect long.  He sprang into the midst ofthe flames, but they did not hurt him, and could not even singea hair of his head.  He carried the log out, and laid itdown.  Hardly, however, had the wood touched the earth than it wastransformed, and the beautiful maiden who had helped him in hisneed stood before him, and by the silken and shining goldengarments which she wore, he knew right well that she was theking's daughter.  But the old woman laughed venomously, and said,you think you have her safe, but you have not got her yet.  Justas she was about to fall on the maiden and take her away, theyouth seized the old woman with both his hands, raised her upon high, and threw her into the jaws of the fire, which closedover her as if it were delighted that an old witch was to beburnt.Then the king's daughter looked at the drummer, and when she sawthat he was a handsome youth and remembered how he had riskedhis life to deliver her, she gave him her hand, and said, youhave ventured everything for my sake, but I also will do everythingfor yours.  Promise to be true to me, and you shall be myhusband.  We shall not want for riches, we shall have enoughwith what the witch has gathered together here.  She led him intothe house, where there were chests and coffers crammed with theold woman's treasures.  The maiden left the gold and silver whereit was, and took only the precious stones.  She would not stayany longer on the glass-mountain, so the drummer said to her,seat yourself by me on my saddle, and then we will fly down likebirds.  I do not like the old saddle, said she, I need onlyturn my wishing-ring and we shall be at home.  Very well, then,answered the drummer, then wish us in front of the town-gate.  Inthe twinkling of an eye they were there, but the drummer said,I will just go to my parents and tell them the news.  Wait forme outside here, I shall soon be back.  Ah, said the king'sdaughter, I beg you to be careful.  On your arrival do not kissyour parents on the right cheek, or else you will forgeteverything, and I shall stay behind here outside, alone anddeserted.  How can I forget you, said he, and promised her tocome back very soon, and gave his hand upon it.  When he went intohis father's house, he had changed so much that no one knew whohe was, for the three days which he had passed on the glass-mountainhad been three years.  Then he made himself known, and his parentsfell on his neck with joy, and his heart was so moved thathe forgot what the maiden had said and kissed them on bothcheeks.  But when he had given them the kiss on the right cheek,every thought of the king's daughter vanished from him.  Heemptied out his pockets, and laid handfuls of the largest jewelson the table.  The parents had not the least idea what to do withthe riches.  Then the father built a magnificent castle allsurrounded by gardens, woods, and meadows as if a prince weregoing to live in it, and when it was ready, the mother said, Ihave found a maiden for you and the wedding shall be in three days.The son was content to do as his parents desired.The poor king's daughter had stood for a long time outside thetown waiting for the return of the young man.  When evening came,she said, he must certainly have kissed his parents on the rightcheek, and has forgotten me.  Her heart was full of sorrow, shewished herself into a solitary little hut in a forest, and wouldnot return to her father's court.  Every evening she went intothe town and passed the young man's house.  He often saw her,but he no longer knew her.  At length she heard the peoplesaying, the wedding will take place to-morrow.  Then she said,I will try if I can win back his heart.On the first day of the wedding ceremonies, she turned herwishing-ring, and said, a dress as bright as the sun.  Instantlythe dress lay before her, and it was as bright as if it had beenwoven of real sunbeams.  When all the guests were assembled, sheentered the hall.  Every one was amazed at the beautiful dress,and the bride most of all, and as pretty dresses were thethings she had most delight in, she went to the stranger and askedif she would sell it to her.  Not for money, she answered, butif I may pass the first night outside the door of the room whereyour betrothed sleeps, I will give it up to you.  The bridecould not overcome her desire and consented, but she mixed asleeping-draught with the wine her betrothed took at night,which made him fall into a deep sleep.  When all had be-           - line missing in book copy -of the bedroom, opened it just a little, and cried,          drummer, drummer, I pray you hear.          Have you forgotten you held me dear.          That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour.          That I rescued your life from the witch's power.          Did you not plight your troth to me.          Drummer, drummer, hearken to me.But it was all in vain, for the drummer did not awake, and whenmorning dawned, the king's daughter was forced to go back againas she came.  On the second evening she turned her wishing-ringand said, a dress as silvery as the moon.  When she appeared atthe feast in the dress which was as soft as moonbeams, it againexcited the desire of the bride, and the king's daughter gave itto herfor permission to pass the second night also, outside the doorof the bedroom.  When in the stillness of the night, she cried,          drummer, drummer, I pray you hear.          Have you forgotten you held me dear.          That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour.          That I rescued your life from the witch's power.          Did you not plight your troth to me.          Drummer, drummer, hearken to me.But the drummer, who was stupefied with the sleeping-draught,could not be aroused.  Sadly next morning she went back toher hut in the forest.  But the people in the house had heardthe lamentation of the unknown maiden, and told the bridegroomabout it.  They told him also that it was impossible that he couldhear anything of it, because the maiden he was going to marryhad poured a sleeping-draught into his wine.On the third evening, the king's daughter turned her wishing-ring,and said, a dress glittering like the stars.  When she showedherself therein at the feast, the bride was quite beside herselfwith the splendor of the dress, which far surpassed the others,and she said, I must, and will have it.  The maiden gave it asshe had given the others for permission to spend the nightoutside the bridegroom's door.  The bridegroom, however, did notdrink the wine which was handed to him before he went to bed,but poured it behind the bed, and when everything was quiet, heheard a sweet voice which called to him,          drummer, drummer, I pray you hear.          Have you forgotten you held me dear.          That on the glass-mountain we sat hour by hour.          That I rescued your life from the witch's power.          Did you not plight your troth to me.          Drummer, drummer, hearken to me.Suddenly his memory returned to him.  Ah, cried he, how can Ihave acted so unfaithfully.  But the kiss which in the joy of myheart I gave my parents, on the right cheek, that is to blamefor it all.  That is what stupefied me.  He sprang up, took theking's daughter by the hand, and led her to his parents, bed.This is my true bride, said he.  If I marry the other, I shalldo a great wrong.  The parents, when they heard how everythinghad happened, gave their consent.  Then the lights in thehall were lighted again, drums and trumpets were brought,friends and relations were invited to come, and the real weddingwas solemnized with great rejoicing.  The first bride receivedthe beautiful dresses as a compensation, and declared herselfsatisfied.In former times, when God himself still walked the earth, thefruitfulness of the soil was much greater than it is now.  Thenthe ears of corn did not bear fifty or sixty, but four or fivehundred-fold.  Then the corn grew from the bottom to the very topof the stalk, and according to the length of the stalk was thelength of the ear.  Men however are so made, that when they aretoo well off they no longer value the blessings which come fromGod, but grow indifferent and careless.  One day a woman waspassing by a corn-field when her little child, who was runningbeside her, fell into a puddle, and dirtied her frock.  On thisthe mother tore up a handful of the beautiful ears of corn, andcleaned the frock with them.When the Lord, who just then came by, saw that, he was angry,and said, henceforth shall the stalks of corn bear no more ears,men are no longer worthy of heavenly gifts.  The by-standers whoheard this, were terrified, and fell on their knees and prayedthat he would still leave something on the stalks, even if thepeople were undeserving of it, for the sake of the innocentchickens which would otherwise have to starve.  The Lord, whoforesaw their suffering, had pity on them, and granted therequest.  So the ears were left as they now grow.There was once upon a time a king who had a daughter,and he caused a glass mountain to be made, and said thatwhosoever could cross to the other side of it without fallingshould have his daughter to wife.  Then there was one who lovedthe king's daughter, and he asked the king if he might have her.Yes, said the king, if you can cross the mountain without falling,you shall have her.  And the princess said she would go over itwith him, and would hold him if he were about to fall.  So theyset out together to go over it, and when they were half way up theprincess slipped and fell, and the glass mountain opened and shuther up inside it, and her betrothed could not see where she hadgone, for the mountain closed immediately.  Then he wept andlamented much, and the king was miserable too, and ordered themountain to be broken open where she had been lost, and thoughthe wouldbe able to get her out again, but they could not find the placeinto which she had fallen.Meanwhile the king's daughter had fallen quite deep down intothe earth into a great cave.  An old fellow with a very long graybeard came to meet her, and told her that if she would be hisservant and do everything he bade her, she might live, if nothe would kill her.  So she did all he bade her.  In the morningshe took his ladder out of his pocket, and set it up against themountain and climbed to the top by its help, and then he drew theladder after him.  The princess had to cook his dinner, make hisbed, and do all his work, and when he came home again he alwaysbrought with him a heap of gold and silver.  When she had livedwith him for many years, and had grown quite old, he called hermother mansrot, and she had to call him old rinkrank.  Then oncewhen he was out, and she had made his bed and washed his dishes,she shut the doors and windows all fast, and there was one littlewindow through which the light shone in, and this she left open.When old rinkrank came home, he knocked at his door, and cried,mother mansrot, open the door for me.  No, said she, old rinkrank,I will not open the door for you.  Then he said,     here stand I, poor rinkrank,     on my seventeen long shanks,     on my weary, worn-out foot,     wash my dishes, mother mansrot.I have washed your dishes already, said she.  Then again he said,     here stand I, poor rinkrank,     on my seventeen long shanks,     on my weary, worn-out foot,     make my bed, mother mansrot.I have made your bed already, said she.  Then again he said,     here stand I, poor rinkrank,     on my seventeen long shanks,     on my weary, worn-out foot,     open the door, mother mansrot.Then he ran all round his house, and saw that the little windowwas open, and thought, I will look in and see what she can be about,and why she will not open the door for me.  He tried to peep in,but could not get his head through because of his long beard.So he first put his beard through the open window, but just as hehad got it through, mother mansrot came by and pulled the windowdown with a cord which she had tied to it, and his beard was shutfast in it.  Then he began to cry most piteously, for it hurthim very much, and to entreat her to release him again.  But shesaid not until he gave her the ladder with which he ascended themountain.  Then, whether he would or not, he had to tell her wherethe ladder was.  And she fastened a very long ribbon to thewindow, and then she set up the ladder, and ascended themountain, and when she was at the top of it she opened thewindow.  She went to her father, and told him all that hadhappened to her.  The king rejoiced greatly, and her betrothedwas still there, and they went and dug up the mountain, and foundold rinkrank inside it with all his gold and silver.  Then theking had old rinkrank put to death, and took all his gold andsilver.  The princess married her betrothed, and lived righthappily in great magnificence and joy.There was once an enchantress, who had three sons who loved eachother as brothers, but the old woman did not trust them, andthought they wanted to steal her power from her.  So she changedthe eldest into an eagle, which was forced to dwell in the rockymountains, and was often seen flying in great circles in the sky.The second, she changed into a whale, which lived in the deep sea,and all that was seen of it was that it sometimes spouted up agreat jet of water in the air.  Each of them bore hishuman form for only two hours daily.  The third son, who was afraidshe might change him into a raging wild beast - a bear perhaps, ora wolf, went secretly away.  He had heard that a king's daughterwho was bewitched, was imprisoned in the castle of the golden sun,and was waiting to be set free.  Those, however, who tried to freeher risked their lives.  Three-and-twenty youths had already dieda miserable death, and now only one other might make the attempt,after which no more must come.  And as his heart was without fear,he made up his mind to seek out the castle of the golden sun.  Hehad already traveled about for a long time without being able tofind it, when he came by chance into a great forest, and did notknow the way out of it.  All at once he saw in the distance twogiants, who made a sign to him with their hands, and when he cameto them they said, we are quarreling about a cap, and which of usit is to belong to, and as we are equally strong, neither of uscan get the better of the other.  The small men are cleverer thanwe are, so we will leave the decision to you.  How can youdispute about an old cap, said the youth.  You do not know whatproperties it has.  It is a wishing-cap, whosoever puts it on, canwish himself away wherever he likes, and in an instant he will bethere.  Give me the cap, said the youth, I will go a shortdistance off, and when I call you, you must run a race, and thecap shall belong to the one who gets first to me.  He put it onand went away, and thought of the king's daughter, forgot thegiants, and walked continually onward.  At length he sighed fromthe very bottom of his heart, and cried, ah, if I were but at thecastle of the golden sun.  And hardly had the words passed hislips than he was standing on a high mountain before thegate of the castle.He entered and went through all the rooms, until in the last hefound the king's daughter.  But how shocked he was when he sawher.  She had an ashen-gray face full of wrinkles, bleary eyes,and red hair.  Are you the king's daughter, whose beauty the wholeworld praises, cried he.  Ah, she answered, this is not my form,human eyes can only see me in this state of ugliness, but that youmay know what I am like, look in the mirror - it does not letitself be misled - it will show you my image as it is in truth.She gave him the mirror in his hand, and he saw therein thelikeness of the most beautiful maiden on earth, and saw, too, howthe tears were rolling down her cheeks with grief.  Then said he,how can you be set free.  I fear no danger.  She said, he who getsthe crystal ball, and holds it before the enchanter, will destroyhis power with it, and I shall resume my true shape.  Ah, sheadded, so many have already gone to meet death for this, and youare so young, I grieve that you should encounter such greatdanger.  Nothing can keep me from doing it, said he, but tell mewhat I must do.  You shall know everything, said the king'sdaughter, when you descend the mountain on which the castle stands,a wild bull will stand below by a spring, and you must fight withit, and if you have the luck to kill it, a fiery bird will springout of it, which bears in its body a red-hot egg, and in the eggthe crystal ball lies as its yolk.  The bird, however, will notlet the egg fall until forced to do so, and if it falls on theground, it will flame up and burn everything that is near, andeven the egg itself will melt, and with it the crystal ball,and then your trouble will have been in vain.The youth went down to the spring, where the bull snorted andbellowed at him.  After a long struggle he plunged his sword in theanimal's body, and it fell down.  Instantly a fiery bird arosefrom it and was about to fly away, but the young man's brother,the eagle, who was passing between the clouds, swooped down,hunted it away to the sea, and struck it with his beak until, inits extremity, it let the egg fall.  The egg, however, did notfall into the sea, but on a fisherman's hut which stood on theshore and the hut began at once to smoke and was about to breakout in flames.  Then arose in the sea waves as high as a house,which streamed over the hut, and subdued the fire.  The otherbrother, the whale, had come swimming to them, and had driven thewater up on high.  When the fire was extinguished, the youthsought for the egg and happily found it, it was not yet melted,but the shell was broken by being so suddenly cooled with thewater, and he could take out the crystal ball unhurt.When the youth went to the enchanter and held it before him,the latter said, my power is destroyed, and from this time forthyou are the king of the castle of the golden sun.  With this youcan likewise give back to your brothers their human form.Then the youth hastened to the king's daughter, and when heentered the room, she was standing there in the full splendorof her beauty, and joyfully they exchanged rings with each other.There was once a king who had a son who asked in marriage thedaughter of a mighty king, she was called maid maleen, and wasvery beautiful.  As her father wished to give her to another,the prince was rejected, but as they both loved each other withall their hearts, they would not give each other up, andmaid maleen said to her father, I can and will take no other formy husband.  Then the king flew into a passion, and ordered adark tower to be built, into which no ray of sunlight or moonlightshould enter.  When it was finished, he said, therein shall you beimprisoned for seven years, and then I will come and see if yourperverse spirit is broken.  Meat and drink for the seven yearswere carried into the tower, and then she and her maid-in-waitingwere led into it and walled up, and thus cut off from the sky andfrom the earth.  There they sat in the darkness, and knew notwhen day or night began.  The king's son often went round andround the tower, and called their names, but no sound fromwithout pierced through the thick walls.  What else could they dobut lament and complain.Meanwhile the time passed, and by the decline of food and drinkthey knew that the seven years were coming to an end.  Theythought the moment of their deliverance was come, but no strokeof the hammer was heard, no stone fell out of the wall, and itseemed to maid maleen that her father had forgotten her.  Asthey had food only for a short time longer, and saw a miserabledeath awaiting them, maid maleen said, we must try our lastchance, and see if we can break through the wall.  She took thebread-knife, and picked and bored at the mortar of a stone, andwhen she was tired, the waiting-maid took her turn.  With greatlabor they succeeded in getting out one stone, and then a second,and a third, and when three days were over the first ray of lightfell on their darkness, and at last the opening was so large thatthey could look out.  The sky was blue, and a fresh breezeplayed on their faces, but how melancholy everything looked allaround.  Her father's castle lay in ruins, the town and thevillages were, so far as could be seen, destroyed by fire, thefields far and wide laid to waste, and no human being was visible.When the opening in the wall was large enough for them to slipthrough, the waiting-maid sprang down first, and then maid maleenfollowed.  But where were they to go.  The enemy had ravaged thewhole kingdom, driven away the king, and slain all the inhabitants.They wandered forth to seek anothercountry, but nowhere did they find a shelter, or a human being togive them a mouthful of bread, and their need was so great thatthey were forced to appease their hunger with nettles.  When,after long journeying, they came into another country, they triedto get work everywhere, but wherever they knocked they were turnedaway, and no one would have pity on them.  At last they arrived ina large city and went to the royal palace.  There also they wereordered to go away, but at last the cook said that they might stayin the kitchen and be scullions.The son of the king in whose kingdom they were, however, was thevery man who had been betrothed to maid maleen.  His father hadchosen another bride for him, whose face was as ugly as her heartwas wicked.  The wedding was fixed, and the maiden had alreadyarrived, but because of her great ugliness she shut herself inher room, and allowed no one to see her, and maid maleen had totake her her meals from the kitchen.  When the day came for thebride and the bridegroom to go to church, she was ashamed of herugliness, and afraid that if she showed herself in the streets,she would be mocked and laughed at by the people.  Then said sheto maid maleen, a great piece of luck has befallen you.  I havesprained my foot, and cannot well walk through the streets, youshall put on wedding-clothes and take my place, a greater honorthan that you cannot have.  Maid maleen, however, refused it, andsaid, I wish for no honor which is not suitable for me.  It was invain, too, that the bride offered her gold.  At last she saidangrily, if you do not obey me, it shall cost you your life.  Ihave but to speak the word, and your head will lie at your feet.Then she was forced to obey, and put on the bride's magnificentclothes and all her jewels.  When she entered the royal hall, everyone was amazed at her great beauty, and the king said to his son,this is the bride whom I have chosen for you, and whom you mustlead to church.  The bridegroom was astonished, and thought, sheis like my maid maleen, and I should believe that it was sheherself, but she has long been shut up in the tower, or dead.He took her by the hand and led her to church.  On the way was anettle-plant, and she said,     oh, nettle-plant,     little nettle-plant,     what dost thou here alone.     I have known the time     when I ate thee unboiled     when I ate thee unroasted.What are you saying, asked the king's son.  Nothing, she replied,I was only thinking of maid maleen.  He was surprised that she knewabout her, but kept silence.  When they came to the foot-plankinto the chuchyard, she said,     foot-bridge, do not break,     I am not the true bride.What are you saying there, asked the the king's son.  Nothing, shereplied, I was only thinking of maid maleen.  Do you know maidmaleen.  No, she answered, how should I know her, I have onlyheard of her.  When they came to the church-door, she said oncemore,     church-door, break not,     I am not the true bride.What are you saying there asked he.  Ah, she answered, I was onlythinking of maid maleen.  Then he took out a precious chain, put itround her neck, and fastened the clasp.  Thereupon they entered thechurch, and the priest joined their hands together before thealtar, and married them.  He led her home, but she did not speaka single word the whole way.  When they got back to the royalpalace, she hurried into the bride's chamber, put off themagnificent clothes and the jewels, dressed herself in her graygown, and kept nothing but the jewel on her neck, which she hadreceived from the bridegroom.When the night came, and the bride was to be led into the prince'sapartment, she let her veil fall over her face, that he might notobserve the deception.  As soon as everyone had gone away, he saidto her,  what did you say to the nettle-plant which was growingby the wayside.To which nettle-plant, asked she, I don't talk to nettle-plants.If you did not do it, then you are not the true bride, said he.So she bethought herself, and said,     I must go out unto my maid     who keeps my thoughts for me.She went out and sought maid maleen.  Girl, what have you beensaying to the nettle.  I said nothing but,     oh, nettle-plant,     little nettle-plant,     what dost thou here alone.     I have known the time     when I ate thee unboiled,     when I ate thee unroasted.The bride ran back into the chamber, and said, I know nowwhat I said to the nettle, and she repeated the words which she hadjust heard.  But what did you say to the foot-bridge when we wentover it asked the king's son.  To the foot-bridge, she answered.I don't talk to foot-bridges.  Then you are not the true bride.She again said,     I must go out unto my maid,     who keeps my thoughts for me.And ran out and scolded maid maleen, girl, what did you say to thefoot-bridge.I said nothing but,     foot-bridge, do not break,     I am not the true bride.That costs you your life, cried the bride, but she hurried intothe room and said, I know now what I said to the foot-bridge,and she repeated the words.  But what did you say to thechurch-door.  To the church-door, she replied, I don't talk tochurch-doors.  Then you are not the true bride.She went out and scolded maid maleen, and said, girl, what did yousay to the church-door.  I said nothing but,     church-door, break not,     I am not the true bride.That will break your neck for you, cried the bride, and flewinto a terrible passion, but she hastened back into the room, andsaid, I know now what I said to the church-door, and sherepeated the words.  But where have you the jewel which I gave youat the church-door.  What jewel, she answered, you did not giveme any jewel.  I myself put it round your neck, and I myselffastened it, if you do not know that, you are not the true bride.He drew the veil from her face, and when he saw her immeasurableugliness, he sprang back terrified, and said, how do you come here.Who are you.  I am your betrothed bride, but because I feared lestthe people should mock me when they saw me out of doors, Icommanded the scullery-maid to dress herself in my clothes, and togo to church instead of me.  Where is the girl, said heI want to see her, go and bring her here.  She went outand told the servants that the scullery-maid was an impostor, andthat they must take her out into the court-yard and strike off herhead.  The servants laid hold of maid maleen and wanted to drag herout, but she screamed so loudly for help, that the king's sonheard her voice, hurried out of his chamber and ordered them toset the maiden free instantly.  Lights were brought, and then hesaw on her neck the gold chain which he had given her at thechurch-door.  You are the true bride, said he, who went with meto church, come with me now to my room.  When they were both alone,he said, on the way to the church you did name maid maleen, whowas my betrothed bride.  If I could believe it possible, I shouldthink she was standing before me - you are like her in everyrespect.  She answered, I am maid maleen, who for your sake wasimprisoned seven years in the darkness, who suffered hunger andthirst, and has lived so long in want and poverty.  Today,however, the sun is shining on me once more.  I was married toyou in the church, and I am your lawful wife.  Then they kissedeach other, and were happy all the days of their lives.  Thefalse bride was rewarded for what she had done by having herhead cut off.The tower in which maid maleen had been imprisoned remainedstanding for a long time, and when the children passed by itthey sang,     king, klang, gloria.     Who sits within this tower.     A king's daughter, she sits within,     a sight of her I cannot win,     the wall it will not break,     the stone cannot be pierced.     Little Hans, with your coat so gay,     follow me, follow me, fast as you may.There was once on a time a mother who had three daughters,the eldest of whom was rude and wicked, the second much better,although she had her faults, but the youngest was a pious, goodchild.  The mother, however, was so strange, that it was justthe eldest daughter whom she most loved, and she could not bearthe youngest.  On this account, she often sent the poor girlout into the great forest in order to get rid of her, for shethought she would lose herself and never come back again.  Butthe guardian-angel which every good child has, did not forsakeher, but always brought her into the right path again.  Once,however, the guardian-angel behaved as if he were not there,and the child could not find her way out of the forest again.She walked on constantly until evening came, and then she sawa tiny light burning in the distance, ran up to it at once,and came to a little hut.  She knocked, the door opened, andshe came to a second door, where she knocked again.  An old man,who had a snow-white beard and looked venerable, opened itfor her.  And he was no other than St. Joseph.  He said quitekindly, come, dear child, seat yourself on my little chair bythe fire, and warm yourself.  I will fetch you clear water ifyou are thirsty.  But here in the forest, I have nothing foryou to eat but a couple of little roots, which you must firstscrape and boil.St. Joseph gave her the roots.  The girl scraped them clean, thenshe brought a piece of pancake and the bread that her motherhad given her to take with her, mixed all together in a pan, andcooked herself a thick soup.  When it was ready, St. Joseph said,I am so hungry, give me some of your food.  The child was quitewilling, and gave him more than she kept for herself, but God'sblessingwas with her, so that she was satisfied.  When they had eaten,St. Joseph said, now we will go to bed.  I have, however, onlyone bed, lay your self in it.  I will lie on the ground on thestraw.  No, answered she, stay in your own bed, the straw issoft enough for me.  But St. Joseph took the child in his arms,and carried her into the little bed, and there she said herprayers, and fell asleep.  Next morning when she awoke, shewanted to say good morning to St. Joseph, but she did not see him.Then she got up and looked for him, but could not find himanywhere.  At last she perceived, behind the door, a bag withmoney so heavy that she could just carry it, and on it waswritten that it was for the child who had slept there that night.On this she took the bag, bounded away with it, and gotsafely to her mother, and as she gave her mother all the money,she could not help being satisfied with her.The next day, the second child also took a fancy to go intothe forest.  Her mother gave her a much larger piece of pancakeand bread.  It happened with her just as with the first child.In the evening she came to St. Joseph's little hut, who gave herroots for a thick soup.  When it was ready, he likewise saidto her, I am so hungry, give me some of your food.  Then thechild said, you may have your share.  Afterwards, when St.Joseph offered her his bed and wanted to lie on the straw, shereplied, no, lie down in the bed, there is plenty of room forboth of us.  St. Joseph took her in his arms and put her in thebed, and laid himself on the straw.In the morning when the child awoke and looked for St. Joseph,he had vanished, but behind the door she found a little sackof money that was about as long as a hand, and on it waswritten that it was for the child who had slept there lastnight.  So she took the little bag and ran home with it, andtook it to her mother, but she secretly kept two pieces forherself.The eldest daughter had by this time grown inquisitive, and thenext morning also insisted on going out into the forest.  Hermother gave her pancakes - as many as she wanted, and breadand cheese as well.  In the evening she found St. Joseph in hislittle hut, just as the two others had found him.  When thesoup was readyand St. Joseph said, I am so hungry, give me some of the food,the girl answered, wait until I am satisfied, then if there isanything left you shall have it.  But she ate nearly thewhole of it, and St. Joseph had to scrape the dish.  Afterwards,the good old man offered her his bed, and wanted to lie onthe straw.  She took it without making any opposition, laidherself down in the little bed, and left the hard straw to thewhite-haired man.  Next morning when she awoke, St. Joseph wasnot to be found, but she did not trouble herself about that.  Shelooked behind the door for a money-bag.  She fancied somethingwas lying on the ground, but as she could not very well distinguishwhat it was, she stooped down, so that she touched it with hernose, where it remained hanging, and when she got up again,she saw, to her horror, that it was a second nose, which washanging fast to her own.  Then she began to scream and howl,but that did no good.  She always had to look at her nose, forit stretched out so far.  Then she ran out and screamed withoutstopping till she met St. Joseph, at whose feet she fell and beggeduntil, out of pity, he took the nose off her again, and evengave her two farthings.  When she got home, her mother was standingbefore the door, and asked, what have you had given to you.  Thenshelied and said, a great bag of money, but I have lost it on the way.Lost it. Cried the mother.  Oh, but we will soon find it again,and took her by the hand, and wanted to seek it with her.  Atfirst she began to cry, and did not wish to go, but at last shewent.  On the way, however, so many lizards and snakes brokeloose on both of them, that they did not know how to savethemselves.  At last they stung the wicked child to death, andthey stung the mother in the foot, because she had not broughther up better.Three hundred years before the birth of the Lord christ, therelived a mother who had twelve sons, but was so poor and needythat she no longer knew how she was to keep them alive.  Sheprayed to God daily that he would grant that all her sons mightbe on the earth with the redeemer who was promised.  When hernecessity became still greater she sent one of them after theother out into the world to seek their bread.  The eldest wascalled peter, and he went out and had already walked a longway, a whole day's journey, when he came into a great forest.He sought for a way out, but could find none, and went fartherand farther astray, and at the same time felt such great hungerthat he could scarcely stand.  At length he became so weak thathe was forced to lie down, and he believed death to be athand.  Suddenly there stood beside him a small boy who shonewith brightness, and was as beautiful and kind as an angel.The child smote his little hands together, until peter wasforced to look up and see him.  Then the child said, why areyou sitting there in such trouble.  Alas. Answered peter, Iam going about the world seeking bread, that I may yet see thedear savior who is promised, that is my greatest desire.  Thechild said, come with me, and your wish shall be fulfilled.  Hetook poor peter by the hand, and led him between some cliffs to agreat cavern.  When they entered it, everything was shiningwith gold, silver, and crystal, and in the midst of it twelvecradles were standing side by side.  Then said the little angel,lie down in the first, and sleep a while, I will rock you.Peter did so, and the angel sang to him and rocked him untilhe was alseep. And when he was asleep, the second brother camealso, guided thither by his guardian angel, and he was rockedto sleep like the first, and thus came the others, one afterthe other, until all twelve lay there sleeping in the goldencradles.  They slept, however, three hundred years, until thenight when the savior of the world was born.  Then they awoke,and were with him on earth, and were called the twelve apostles.There was once a poor woman who had two children.  The youngesthad to go every day into the forest to fetch wood.  Once whenshe had gone a long way to seek it, a little child, whowas quite strong, came and helped her industriously to pick upthe wood and carry it home, and then before a moment had passedthe strange child disappeared.  The child told her mother this,but at first she would not believe it.  At length she broughta rose home, and told her mother that the beautiful child hadgiven her thisrose, and had told her that when it was in full bloom, he wouldreturn.  The mother put the rose in water.  One morning herchild could not get out of bed.  The mother went to the bed andfound her dead, but she lay looking very happy.  On the samemorning, the rose was in full bloom.There was once a king's son who went out into the world, andhe was full of thought and sad.  He looked at the sky, whichwas so beautifully pure and blue, then he sighed, and said,how well must all be with one up there in heaven.Then he saw a poor gray-haired man who was coming along theroad towards him, and he spoke to him, and asked, how can Iget to heaven.  The man answered, by poverty and humility.  Puton my ragged clothes, wander about the world for seven years,and get to know what misery is, take no money, but if you are hungryask compassionate hearts for a bit of bread.  In this way you willreach heaven.Then the king's son took off his magnificent coat, and wore inits place the beggar's garment, went out into the wide world,and suffered great misery.  He took nothing but a little food,said nothing, but prayed to the Lord to take him into hisheaven.  When theseven years were over, he returned to his father's palace, but noone recognized him.  He said to the servants, go and tell myparents that I have come back again.  But the servants did notbelieve it, and laughed and left him standing there.  Then said he,go and tell it to my brothers that they may come down, for Ishould so like to see them again.  The servants would not do thateither, but at last one of them went, and told it to the king'schildren, but these did not believe it, and did not troublethemselves about it.  Then he wrote a letter to his mother, anddescribed to her all his misery, but he did not say that he washer son.  So out of pity, the queen had a place under the stairsassigned to him, and food taken to him daily by two servants.  Butone of them was ill-natured and said, why should the beggar havethe good food, and kept it for himself, or gave it to thedogs, and took the weak, emaciated beggar nothing but water.  Theother, however, was honest, and took the beggar what was sent tohim.  It was little, but he could live on it for a while, andall the time he was quite patient, but he grew continually weaker.As his illness increased, he desired to receive the last sacrament.When the mass was being celebrated, all the bells in the town andneighborhood began to ring of their own accord.  After mass thepriest went to the poor man under the stairs, and there he laydead.  In one hand he had a rose, in the other a lily, and besidehim was a paper on which was written his history.When he was buried, a rose grew on one side of his grave, and alily on the other.There were once upon a time two sisters, one of whom had nochildren and was rich, and the other had five and was awidow, and so poor that she no longer had food enough to satisfyherself and her children.  In her need, therefore, she went toher sister, and said, my children and I are suffering the greatesthunger.  You are rich, give me a mouthful of bread.  The veryrich sister was as hard as a stone, and said, I myself have nothingin the house, and drove away the poor creature with harsh words.After some time the husband of the rich sister came home, and wasjust going to cut himself a piece of bread, but when he made thefirst cut into the loaf, out flowed red blood.  When the womansaw that she was terrified and told him what had occurred.  Hehurried away to help the widow and her children, but when heentered her room, he found her praying.  She had her two youngestchildren in her arms, and the three eldest were lying dead.  Heoffered her food, but she answered, for earthly food have we nolonger any desire.  God has already satisfied the hunger of threeof us, and he will hearken to our supplications likewise.Scarcely had she uttered these words than the two little onesdrew their last breath, whereupon her heart broke, and she sankdown dead.There was once upon a time a hermit who lived in a forest at thefoot of a mountain, and passed his time in prayer and good works,and every evening he carried, to the glory of God, two pails ofwater up the mountain.  Many a beast drank of it, and many a plantwas refreshed by it, for on the heights above, a strong wind blewcontinually, which dried the air and the ground, and the wildbirds which dread mankind wheel about there, and with their sharpeyes search for a drink.  And because the hermit was so pious, anangel of God, visible to his eyes, went up with him, counted hissteps, and when the work was completed, brought him his food, evenas the prophet of old was by God's command fed by the raven.  Whenthe hermit in his piety had already reached a great age, ithappened that he once saw from afar a poor sinner being taken tothe gallows.  He said carelessly to himself, there, that one isgetting his deserts.  In the evening, when he was carrying thewater up the mountain, the angel who usually accompanied him didnot appear, and also brought him no food.  Then he was terrified,and searched his heart, and tried to think how he could havesinned, as God was so angry, but he did not discover it.  Thenhe neither ate nor drank, threw himself down on the ground, andprayed day and night.  And as he was one day thus bitterlyweeping in the forest, he heard a little bird singing beautifullyand delightfully, and then he was still more troubled and said,how joyously you sing, the Lord is not angry with you.  Ah, ifyou could but tell me how I can have offended him, that I mightdo penance, and then my heart also would be glad again.  Then thebird began to speak and said, you have done injustice, in thatyou have condemned a poor sinner who was being led to the gallows,and for that the Lord is angry with you.  He alone sits injudgement.  However, if you will do penance and repent your sins,he will forgive you.  Then the angel stood beside him with a drybranch in his hand and said, you shall carry this dry branch untilthree green twigs sprout out of it, but at night when you willsleep, you shall lay it under your head.  You shall beg yourbread from door to door, and not tarry more than one night in thesame house.  That is the penance which the Lord lays on you.Then the hermit took the piece of wood, and went back into theworld, which he had not seen for so long.  He ate and dranknothing but what was given him at the doors.  Many petitions,however, were not listened to, and many doors remained shut tohim, so that he often did not get a crumb of bread.Once when he had gone from door to door from morning till night,and no one had given him anything, and no one would shelter himfor the night, he went forth into a forest, and at last found acave which someone had made, and an old woman was sitting in it.Then said he, good woman, keep me with you in your house forthis night.  But she said, no, I dare not, even if I wished,I have three sons who are wicked and wild, if they come homefrom their robbing expedition, and find you, they would kill usboth.  The hermit said, let me stay, they will do no injuryeither to you or to me.  And the old woman was compassionate,and let herself be persuaded.  Then the man lay down beneath thestairs, and put the bit of wood under his head.  When the oldwoman saw him do that, she asked the reason of it, on which hetold her that he carried the bit of wood about with him for apenance, and used it at night for a pillow, and that he hadoffended the Lord, because, when he had seen a poor sinner onthe way to the gallows, he had said he was getting his deserts.Then the woman began to weep and cried, if the Lord punishes onesingle word, how will it fare with my sons when they appearbefore him in judgment.At midnight the robbers came home and blustered and stormed.They made a fire, and when it had lighted up the cave and theysaw a man lying under the stairs, they fell in a rage and cried totheir mother, who is the man.  Have we not forbidden anyonewhomsoever to be taken in.  Then said the mother, let him alone,it is a poor sinner who is expiating his crime.  The robbersasked, what has he done.  Old man, cried they, tell us your sins.The old man raised himself and told them how he, by one singleword, had so sinned that God was angry with him, and how he wasnow expiating this crime.  The robbers were so powerfully touchedin their hearts by this story, that they were shocked with theirlife up to this time, reflected, and began with heartyrepentance to do penance for it.  The hermit, after he hadconverted the three sinners, lay down to sleep again under thestairs.  In the morning, however, they found him dead, and out ofthe dry wood on which his head lay, three green twigs had grownup on high.  Thus the Lord had once more received him into hisfavor.In a large town there was an old woman who sat in the evening alonein her room thinking how she had lost first her husband, thenboth her children, then one by one all her relatives, and atlength, that very day, her last friend, and now she was quitealone and desolate.  She was very sad at heart, and heaviest ofall her losses to her was that of her sons, and in her pain sheblamed God for it.  She was still sitting lost in thought, whenall at once she heard the bells ringing for early prayer.  She wassurprised that she had thus in her sorrow watched through thewhole night, and lighted her lantern and went to church.  It wasalready lighted up when she arrived, but not as it usually waswith wax candles, but with a dimlight.  It was also crowded already with people, and all theseats were filled, and when the old woman got to her usual placeit also was not empty, but the whole bench was entirely full.  Andwhen she looked at the people, they were none other than her deadrelatives who were sitting there in their old-fashioned garments,but with pale faces.  They neither spoke nor sang, but a softhumming and whispering was heard all over the church.  Then anaunt of hers stood up, stepped forward, and said to the poor oldwoman, look there beside the altar, and you will see your sons.The old woman looked there, and saw her two children, one hangingon the gallows, the other bound to the wheel.  Then said the aunt,behold, so would it have been with them if they had lived, and ifthe good God had not taken them to himself when they wereinnocent children.  The old woman went trembling home, and on herknees thanked God for having dealt with her more kindly than shehad been able to understand, and on the third day she lay downand died.One afternoon the christ-child had laid himself in his cradle-bedand had fallen asleep.  Then his mother came to him, looked at himfull of gladness, and said, have you laid yourself down to sleep,my child.  Sleep sweetly, and in the meantime, I will go into thewood, and fetch you a handful of strawberries, for I know that youwill be pleased with them when you awake.  In the wood outside,she found a spot with the most beautiful strawberries, but as shewas stooping to gather one, an adder sprang up out of the grass.She was alarmed, left the strawberries where they were, andhastened away.  The adder darted after her, but our lady, as youcan readily understand, knew what it was best to do.  She hidherself behind a hazel-bush, and stood there until the adder hadcrept away again.  Then she gathered the strawberries, and as sheset out on her way home she said, as the hazel-bush has been myprotection this time, it shall in future protect others also.Therefore, from the most remote times, a green hazel-branch hasbeen the safest protection against adders, snakes, and everythingelse which creeps on the earth.A certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse, and hadsaid so much to her about the great love and friendship shefelt for her, that at length the mouse agreed that they shouldlive and keep house together.  But we must make a provisionfor winter, or else we shall suffer from hunger, said the cat,and you, little mouse, cannot venture everywhere, or you will becaught in a trap some day.  The good advice was followed, and apot of fat was bought, but they did not know where to put it.At length, after much consideration, the cat said, I know no placewhere it will be better stored up than in the church, for no onedares take anything away from there.  We will set it beneath thealtar, and not touch it until we are really in need of it.  Sothe pot was placed in safety, but it was not long before the cathad a great yearning for it, and said to the mouse, I want totell you something, little mouse, my cousin has brought a littleson into the world, and has asked me to be godmother, he is whitewith brown spots, and I am to hold him over the font at thechristening.  Let me go out to-day, and you look after the houseby yourself.  Yes, yes, answered the mouse, by all means go, and ifyou get anything very good to eat, think ofme, I should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself.All this, however, was untrue, the cat had no cousin, and had notbeen asked to be godmother.  She went straight to the church, stoleto the pot of fat, began to lick at it, and licked the top of thefat off.  Then she took a walk upon the roofs of the town, lookedout for opportunities, and then stretched herself in the sun, andlicked her lips whenever she thought of the pot of fat, and notuntil it was evening did she return home.  Well, here you areagain, said the mouse, no doubt you have had a merry day.  All wentoff well, answered the cat.  What name did they give the child.Top off, said the cat quite coolly.  Top off, cried the mouse,that is a very odd and uncommon name, is it a usual one in yourfamily.  What does that matter, said the cat, it is no worse thancrumb-stealer, as your God-children are called.Before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning.  Shesaid to the mouse, you must do me a favor, and once more managethe house for a day alone.  I am again asked to be godmother, and,as the child has a white ring round its neck, I cannot refuse.The good mouse consented, but the cat crept behind the town wallsto the church, and devoured half the pot of fat.  Nothing everseems so good as what one keeps to oneself, said she, and was quitesatisfied with her day's work.  When she went home the mouseinquired, and what was this child christened.  Half-done, answeredthe cat.  Half-done.  What are you saying.  I never heard the namein my life, I'll wager anything it is not in the calendar.The cat's mouth soon began to water for some more licking.  Allgood things go in threes, said she, I am asked to stand godmotheragain.  The child is quite black, only it has white paws, but withthat exception, it has not a single white hair on its whole body,this only happens once every few years, you will let me go, won'tyou.  Top-off.  Half-done, answered the mouse, they are such oddnames, they make me very thoughtful.  You sit at home, said thecat, in your dark-grey fur coat and long tail, and are filledwith fancies, that's because you do not go out in the daytime.During the cat's absence the mouse cleaned the house, and put itin orderbut the greedy cat entirely emptied the pot of fat.  Wheneverything is eaten up one has some peace, said she to herself,and well filled and fat she did not return home till night.  Themouse at once asked what name had been given to the third child.It will not please you more than the others, said the cat.  Heis called all-gone.  All-gone, cried the mouse, that is the mostsuspicious name of all.  I have never seen it in print.  All-gone,what can that mean, and she shook her head, curled herself up,and lay down to sleep.From this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother, butwhen the winter had come and there was no longer anything to befound outside, the mouse thought of their provision, and said,come cat, we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored upfor ourselves - we shall enjoy that.  Yes, answered the cat, youwill enjoy it as much as you would enjoy sticking that daintytongue of yours out of the window.  They set out on their way,but when they arrived, the pot of fat certainly was still in itsplace, but it was empty.  Alas, said the mouse, now I see what hashappened, now it comes to light.  You are a true friend.  Youhave devoured all when you were standing godmother.  First top offthen half done, then -.  Will you hold your tongue, cried thecat, one word more and I will eat you too.  All gone was alreadyon the poor mouse's lips, scarcely had she spoken it before thecat sprang on her, seized her, and swallowed her down.  Verily,that is the way of the world.There was once a wonderful musician, who went quite forlornthrough a forest and thought of all manner of things, and whennothing was left for him to think about, he said to himself,time is beginning to pass heavily with me here in the forest,I will fetch hither a good companion for myself.  Then he took hisfiddle from his back, and played so that it echoed through thetrees.  It was not long before a wolf came trotting through thethicket towards him.  Ah, here is a wolf coming.  I have no desirefor him, said the musician but the wolf came nearer and said tohim, ah, dear musician, how beautifully you play.  I should like tolearn that, too.  It is soon learnt, the musician replied, youhave only to do all that I bid you.  Oh, musician, said the wolf,I will obey you as a scholar obeys his master.  The musician badehim follow, and when they had gone part of the way together, theycame to an old oak-tree which was hollow inside, and cleft in themiddle.  Look, said the musician, if you will learn to fiddle, putyour fore paws into this crevice.  The wolf obeyed, but themusician quickly picked up a stone and with one blow wedged histwo paws so fast that he was forced to stay there like a prisoner.Wait there until I come back again, said the musician, and wenthis way.After a while he again said to himself, time is beginning to passheavily with me here in the forest, I will fetch hither anothercompanion, and took his fiddle and again played in the forest.  Itwas not long before a fox came creeping through the trees towardshim.  Ah, there's a fox coming, said the musician.  I have nodesire for him.  The fox came up to him and said, oh, dearmusician, how beautifully you play.  I should like to learn thattoo.  That is soon learnt, said the musician.  You have only todo everything that I bid you.  Oh, musician, then said the fox, Iwill obey you as a scholar obeys his master.  Follow me, said themusician, and when they had walked a part of the way, they came toa footpath, with high bushes on both sides of it.  There themusician stood still, and from one side bent a young hazel-bushdown to the ground, and put his foot on the end of it.  Then hebent down a young tree from the other side as well, and said, nowlittle fox, if you will learn something, give me your left frontpaw.  The fox obeyed, and the musician fastened his paw to theleft bough.  Little fox, said he, now reach me your right paw.And he tied it to the right bough.  When he had examined whetherthe knots were firm enough, he let go, and the bushes sprang upagain, and jerked up the little fox, so that it hung strugglingin the air.  Wait there till I come back again, said the musician,and went on his way.Again he said to himself, time is beginning to pass heavily withme here in the forest, I will fetch hither another companion.So he took his fiddle, and the sound echoed through the forest.Then a little hare came springing towards him.  Ah, a hare iscoming, said the musician, I do not want him.  Ah, dearmusician, said the hare, how beautifully you fiddle, I too,should like to learn that.  That is soon learnt, said themusician, you have only to do everything that I bid you.Oh, musician, replied the little hare, I will obey you as ascholar obeys his master.  They went a part of the way togetheruntil they came to an open space in the forest, where stood anaspen tree.  The musician tied a long string round the littlehare's neck,the other end of which he fastened to the tree.  Now briskly,little hare, run twenty times round the tree, cried the musician,and the little hare obeyed, and when it had run round twenty times,it had twisted the string twenty times round the trunk of the tree,and the little hare was caught, and let it pull and tug as itliked, it only made the string cut into its tender neck.  Waitthere till I come back, said the musician, and went onwards.The wolf, in the meantime, had pushed and pulled and bitten atthe stone, and had worked so long that he had set his feet atliberty and had drawn them once more out of the cleft.  Full ofanger and rage he hurried after the musician and wanted to tearhim to pieces.  When the fox saw him running, he began to lament,and cried with all his might, brother wolf, come to my help, themusician has betrayed me.  The wolf drew down the little tree,bit the cord in two, and freed the fox, who went with him to takerevenge on the musician.  They found the tied-up hare, whomlikewise they rescued, and then they all sought the enemytogether.The musician had once more played his fiddle as he went on hisway, and this time he had been more fortunate.  The soundreached the ears of a poor wood-cutter, who instantly, whetherhe would or no, gave up his work and came with his hatchet underhis arm to listen to the music.  At last comes the rightcompanion, said the musician, for I was seeking a human being,and no wild beast.  And he began and played so beautifully anddelightfully that the poor man stood there as if bewitched, andhis heart leaped with gladness.  And as he thus stood, the wolf,the fox, and the hare came up, and he saw well that they had someevil design.  So he raised his glittering axe and placedhimself before the musician, as if to say, whoso wishes to touchhim let him beware, for he will have to deal with me.  Then thebeasts were terrified and ran back into the forest.  Themusician, however, played once more to the man out ofgratitude, and then went onwards.The cock once said to the hen, it is now the time when the nutsare ripe, so let us go to the hill together and for onceeat our fill before the squirrel takes them all away.  Yes,replied the hen, come, we will have some fun together.  Thenthey went away to the hill, and as it was a bright day theystayed till evening.  Now I do not know whether it was that theyhad eaten till they were too fat, or whether they had becometoo proud, but they would not go home on foot, and the cock hadto build a little carriage of nut-shells.  When it was ready,the little hen seated herself in it and said to the cock, you canjust harness yourself to it.  I like that. Said the cock.  Iwould rather go home on foot than let myself be harnessed to it.No, that is not our bargain.  I do not mind being coachmanand sitting on the box, but drag it myself I will not.As they were thus disputing, a duck quacked at them, you thievingfolks, who bade you go to my nut-hill.  Wait, you shall sufferfor it, and ran with open beak at the cock.  But the cock also wasnot idle, and fell boldly on the duck, and at last wounded herso with his spurs that she begged for mercy, and willingly letherself be harnessed to the carriage as a punishment.  Thelittle cock now seated himself on the box and was coachman, andthereupon they went off at a gallop, with the cock crying, duck,go as fast as you can.  When they had driven a part of the waythey met two foot-passengers, a pin and a needle.  They cried,stop. Stop. And said that it would soon be as dark as pitch,and then they could not go a step further, and that it was sodirty on the road, and asked if they could not get into thecarriage for a while.  They had been at the tailor's public-houseby the gate, and had stayed too long over the beer.  As they werethin people, who did not take up much room,the cock let them both get in, but they had to promise him and hislittle hen not to step on their feet.  Late in the evening theycame to an inn, and as they did not like to go further by night,and as the duck also was not strong on her feet, and fell fromone side to the other, they went in.  The host at first made manyobjections, his house was already full, besides he thought theycould not be very distinguished persons.  But at last, as theymade pleasant speeches, and told him that he should have theegg which the little hen had laid on the way, and should likewisekeep the duck, which laid one every day, he at length said thatthey might stay the night.  And now they had themselves wellserved, and feasted and had a high good time.  Early in themorning, when day was breaking and every one was asleep, thecock awoke the hen, brought the egg, pecked it open, and theyate it together, but they threw the shell on the hearth.  Thenthey went to the needle which was still asleep, took it bythe head and stuck it into the cushion of the landlord's chair,and put the pin in his towel, and at last without more ado theyfled away over the heath.  The duck who liked to sleep inthe open air and had stayed in the yard, heard them going away,made herself merry and found a stream, down which she swam, whichwas a much quicker way of traveling than being harnessed to acarriage.  The host did not get out of bed until a couple ofhours later.  He washed himself and was about to dry himself, whenthe pin went over his face and made a red scratch from one earto the other.  After this he went into the kitchen and wantedto light a pipe, but when he came to the hearth the egg-shelldarted into his eyes.  This morning everything attacks my head,said he, and angrily sat down on his grandfather's chair, buthe quickly started up again and cried, ow, for the needle hadpricked him still worse than the pin, and not in the head.  Nowhe was thoroughly angry, and suspected the guests who had comeso late the night before.  And when he went in search of them,they were gone.  Then he made a vow to take no more ragamuffinsinto his house, for they consume much, pay for nothing, and playmischievous tricks into the bargain by way of gratitude.In a village dwelt a poor old woman, who had gathered together adish of beans and wanted to cook them.  So she made a fire onher hearth, and that it might burn the quicker, she lighted itwith a handful of straw.  When she was emptying the beans intothe pan, one dropped without her observing it, and lay on theground beside a straw, and soon afterwards a burning coal fromthe fire leapt down to the two.  Then the straw began and said,dear friends, from whence do you come here.  The coal replied,I fortunately sprang out of the fire, and if I had not escapedby sheer force, my death would have been certain, I should havebeen burnt to ashes.  The bean said, I too have escaped witha whole skin, but if the old woman had got me into the pan,I should have been made into broth without any mercy, like mycomrades.  And would a better fate have fallen to my lot, saidthe straw.  The old woman has destroyed all my brethren infire and smoke.  She seized sixty of them at once, and tooktheir lives.  I luckily slipped through her fingers.But what are we to do now, said the coal.I think, answered the bean, that as we have so fortunatelyescaped death, we should keep together like good companions, andlest a new mischance should overtake us here, we should go awaytogether, and repair to a foreign country.The proposition pleased the two others, and they set out on theirway together.  Soon, however, they came to a little brook, andas there was no bridge or foot-plank, they did not know how theywere to get over it.  The straw hit on a good idea, and said,I will lay myself straight across, and then you can walk over onme as on a bridge.  The straw therefore stretched itself fromone bank to the other, and the coal, who was of an impetuousdisposition, tripped quite boldly on to the newly-built bridge.But when she had reached the middle, and heard the water rushingbeneath her, she was, after all, afraid, and stood still, andventured no farther.  The straw, however, began to burn, brokein two pieces, and fell into the stream.  The coal slipped afterher, hissed when she got into the water, and breathed her last.The bean, who had prudently stayed behind on the shore, couldnot but laugh at the event, was unable to stop, and laughed soheartily that she burst.  It would have been all over with her,likewise, if, by good fortune, a tailor who was traveling insearch of work, had not sat down to rest by the brook.  As he hada compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread, andsewed her together.  The bean thanked him most prettily, butas the tailor used black thread, all beans since then have ablack seam.There was once upon a time a fisherman who lived with his wifein a pig-stye close by the sea, and every day he went out fishing.And he fished, and he fished.  And once he was sitting with hisrod, looking at the clear water, and he sat and he sat.  Thenhis line suddenly went down, far down below, and whenhe drew it up again, he brought out a large flounder.  Then theflounder said to him, hark, you fisherman, I pray you, let melive, I am no flounder really, but an enchanted prince.  Whatgood will it do you to kill me.  I should not be good to eat, putme in the water again, and let me go.  Come, said the fisherman,there is no need for so many words about it - a fish that cantalk I should certainly let go, anyhow.  And with that he puthim back again into the clear water, and the flounder went to thebottom, leaving a long streak of blood behind him.  Then thefisherman got up and went home to his wife in the pig-stye.Husband, said the woman, have you caught nothing to-day.  No, saidthe man, I did catch a flounder, who said he was an enchantedprince, so I let him go again.  Did you not wish for anythingfirst, said the woman.  No, said the man, what should I wishfor.  Ah, said the woman, it is surely hard to have to livealways in this pig-stye which stinks and is so disgusting.  Youmight have wished for a little hut for us.  Go back and callhim.  Tell him we want to have a little hut, he will certainlygive us that.  Ah, said the man, why should I go there again.Why, said the woman, you did catch him, and you let him go again.He is sure to do it.  Go at once.  The man still did not quitelike to go, but did not like to oppose his wife either, andwent to the sea.When he got there the sea was all green and yellow, and nolonger so smooth, so he stood still and said,          flounder, flounder in the sea,          come, I pray thee, here to me.          For my wife, good ilsabil,          wills not as I'd have her will.Then the flounder came swimming to him and said, well what doesshe want, then.  Ah, said the man, I did catch you, andmy wife says I really ought to have wished for something.She does not like to live in a pig-stye any longer.  She wouldlike to have a hut.  Go, then, said the flounder, she has italready.When the man went home, his wife was no longer in the stye,but instead of it there stood a hut, and she was sitting on abench before the door.  Then she took him by the hand and saidto him, just come inside.  Look, now isn't this a great dealbetter.  So they went in, and there was a small porch, and apretty little parlor and bedroom, and a kitchen and pantry,with the best of furniture, and fitted up with the mostbeautiful things made of tin and brass, whatsoever was wanted.And behind the hut there was a  small yard, with hens and ducks,and a little garden with flowers and fruit.  Look, said thewife, is not that nice.  Yes, said the husband, and so it shallremain - now we will live quite contented.  We will think aboutthat said the wife.  With that they ate something and went tobed.Everything went well for a week or a fortnight, and then thewoman said, hark you, husband, this hut is far too small for us,and the garden and yard are little.  The flounder might just aswell have given us a larger house.  I should like to live in agreat stone castle.  Go to the flounder, and tell him to giveus a castle.  Ah, wife, said the man, the hut is quite goodenough.  Why whould we live in a castle.  What. Said thewoman.  Just go there, the flounder can always do that.  No,wife, said the man, the flounder has just given us the hut,I do not like to go back so soon, it might make him angry.Go, said the woman, he can do it quite easily, and will be gladto do it.  Just you go to him.The man's heart grew heavy, and he would not go.  He said tohimself, it is not right, and yet he went.  And when he cameto the sea the water was quite purple and dark-blue, and greyand thick, and no longer so green and yellow, but it was stillquiet.  And he stood there and said,          flounder, flounder in the sea,          come, I pray thee, here to me.          For my wife, good ilsabil,          wills not as I'd have her will.Well, what does she want, now, said the flounder.  Alas, saidthe man, half scared, she wants to live in a great stone castle.Go to it, then, she is standing before the door, said theflounder.Then the man went away, intending to go home, but when hegot there, he found a great stone palace, and his wife wasjust standing on the steps going in, and she took him by thehand and said, come in.  So he went in with her, and in thecastle was a great hall paved with marble, and many servants,who flung wide the doors.  And the walls were all bright withbeautiful hangings, and in the rooms were chairs and tablesof pure gold, and crystal chandeliers hung from the ceiling,and all the rooms and bedrooms had carpets, and food and wineof the very best were standing on all the tables, so that theynearly broke down beneath it.  Behind the house, too, therewas a great court-yard, with stables for horses and cows, andthe very best of carriages.  There was a magnificent largegarden, too, with the most beautiful flowers and fruit-trees,and a park quite half a mile long, in which were stags, deer,and hares, and everything that could be desired.  Come, saidthe woman, isn't that beautiful.  Yes, indeed, said the man,now let it be, and we will live in this beautiful castleand be content.  We will consider about that, said the woman,and sleep upon it.  Thereupon they went to bed.Next morning the wife awoke first, and it was just daybreak,and from her bed she saw the beautiful country lying beforeher.  Her husband was still stretching himself, so she pokedhim in the side with her elbow, and said, get up, husband,and just peep out of the window.  Look you, couldn't we be theking over all that land.  Go to the flounder, we will be theking.  Ah, wife, said the man, why should we be king.  Ido not want to be king.  Well, said the wife, if you won't beking, I will.  Go to the flounder, for I will be king.  Ah,wife, said the man, why do you want to be king.  I do not liketo say that to him.  Why not, said the woman.  Go to him thisinstant.  I must be king.  So the man went, and was quiteunhappy because his wife wished to be king.  It is not right,it is not right, thought he.  He did not wish to go, but yethe went.And when he came to the sea, it was quite dark-grey, and thewater heaved up from below, and smelt putrid.  Then he wentand stood by it, and said,
          flounder, flounder in the sea,          come, I pray thee, here to me.          For my wife, good ilsabil,          wills not as I'd have her will.Well, what does she want, now. Said the flounder.  Alas, saidthe man, she wants to be king.  Go to her.  She is kingalready.So the man went, and when he came to the palace, the castlehad become much larger, and had a great tower and magnificentornaments, and the sentinel was standing before the door, andthere were numbers of soldiers with kettle-drums and trumpets.Andwhen he went inside the house, everything was of real marbleand gold, with velvet covers and great golden tassels.  Thenthe doors of the hall were opened, and there was the court inall its splendor, and his wife was sitting on a high throneof gold and diamonds, with a great crown of gold on her head,and a sceptre of pure gold and jewels in her hand, and onboth sides of her stood her maids-in-waiting in a row, eachof them always one head shorter than the last.Then he went and stood before her, and said, ah, wife, andnow you are king.  Yes, said the woman, now I am king.  Sohe stood and looked at her, and when he had looked at her thusfor some time, he said, and now that you are king, let all elsebe, now we will wish for nothing more.  No, husband, said thewoman, quite anxiously, I find time passes very heavily, I canbear it no longer.  Go to the flounder - I am king, but I mustbe emperor, too.  Oh, wife, why do you wish to be emperor.Husband, said she, go to the flounder.  I will be emperor.Alas, wife, said the man, he cannot make you emperor.  I may notsay that to the fish.  There is only one emperor in the land.  Anemperor the flounder cannot make you.  I assure you he cannot.What. Said the woman, I am the king, and you are nothing butmy husband.  Will you go this moment.  Go at once.  If he canmake a king he can make an emperor.  I will be emperor.  Goinstantly.  So he was forced to go.  As the man went, however, hewas troubled in mind, and thought to himself, it will not endwell.  It will not end well.  Emperor is too shameless.  Theflounder will at last be tired out.With that he reached the sea, and the sea was quite black andthick, and began to boil up from below, so that it threw upbubbles, and such a sharp wind blew over it that it curdled, andthe man was afraid.  Then he went and stood by it, and said,          flounder, flounder in the sea,          come, I pray thee, here to me.          For my wife, good ilsabil,          wills not as I'd have her will.Well, what does she want, now, said the flounder.  Alas, flounder,said he, my wife wants to be emperor.  Go to her, said theflounder.  She is emperor already.So the man went, and when he got there the whole palace was madeof polished marble with alabaster figures and golden ornaments,and soldiers were marching before the door blowing trumpets,and beating cymbals and drums.  And in the house, barons, andcounts, and dukes were going about as servants.  Then they openedthe doors to him, which were of pure gold.  And when heentered, there sat his wife on a throne, which was made of onepiece of gold, and was quite two miles high.  And she wore a greatgolden crown that was three yards high, and set with diamonds andcarbuncles, and in one hand she had the sceptre, and in theother the imperial orb.  And on both sides of her stood theyeomen of the guard in two rows, each being smaller than the onebefore him, from the biggest giant, who was two miles high, to thevery smallest dwarf, just as big as my little finger.  Andbefore it stood a number of princes and dukes.Then the man went and stood among them, and said, wife, are youemperor now.  Yes, said she, now I am emperor.  Then he stoodand looked at her well, and when he had looked at her thus forsome time, he said, ah, wife, be content, now that you areemperor.  Husband, said she, why are you standing there.  Now, Iam emperor, but I will be pope too.  Go to the flounder.  Oh,wife, said the man, what will you not wish for.  You cannot bepope.  There is but one in christendom.  He cannot make you pope.Husband, said she, I will be pope.  Go immediately, I must bepope this very day.  No, wife, said the man, I do not like tosay that to him.  That would not do, it is too much.  The floundercan't make you pope.  Husband, said she, what nonsense.  If hecan make an emperor he can make a pope.  Go to him directly.I am emperor, and you are nothing but my husband.  Will you goat once.Then he was afraid and went, but he was quite faint, andshivered and shook, and his knees and legs trembled.  And a highwind blew over the land, and the clouds flew, and towards eveningall grew dark, and the leaves fell from the trees, and the waterrose and roared as if it were boiling, and splashed upon theshore.  And in the distance he saw ships which were firing gunsin their sore need, pitching and tossing on the waves.  And yetin the midst of the sky there was still a small patch of blue,though on every side it was as red as in a heavy storm.  So,full of despair, he went and stood in much fear and said,          flounder, flounder in the sea,          come, I pray thee, here to me.          For my wife, good ilsabil,          wills not as I'd have her will.Well, what does she want, now, said the flounder.  Alas, said theman, she wants to be pope.  Go to her then, said the flounder,she is pope already.So he went, and when he got there, he saw what seemed to be alarge church surrounded by palaces.  He pushed his way throughthe crowd.  Inside, however, everything was lighted up withthousands and thousands of candles, and his wife was clad ingold, and she was sitting on a much higher throne, and had threegreat golden crowns on, and round about her there was muchecclesiastical splendor.  And on both sides of her was a row ofcandles the largest of which was as tall as the very tallest tower,down to the very smallest kitchen candle, and all the emperorsand kings were on their knees before her, kissing her shoe.Wife, said the man, and looked attentively at her, are you nowpope.  Yes, said she, I am pope.  So he stood and looked at her,and it was just as if he was looking at the bright sun.  When hehad stood looking at her thus for a short time, he said, ah,wife, if you are pope, do let well alone.  But she looked asstiff as a post, and did not move or show any signs of life.Then said he, wife, now that you are pope, be satisfied, youcannot become anything greater now.  I will consider about that,said the woman.  Thereupon they both went to bed, but she wasnot satisfied, and greediness let her have no sleep, for shewas continually thinking what there was left for her to be.The man slept well and soundly, for he had run about a greatdeal during the day.  But the woman could not fall asleep atall, and flung herself from one side to the other the wholenight through, thinking always what more was left for her tobe, but unable to call to mind anything else.  At length thesun began to rise, and when the woman saw the red of dawn,she sat up in bed and looked at it.  And when, through thewindow, she saw the sun thus rising, she said, cannot I, too,order the sun and moon to rise.  Husband, she said, poking himin the ribs with her elbows, wake up.  Go to the flounder, forI wish to be even as God is.  The man was still half asleep,but he was so horrified that he fell out of bed.  He thoughthe must have heard amiss, and rubbed his eyes, and said, wife,what are you saying.  Husband, said she, if I can't order thesun and moon to rise, and have to look on and see the sunand moon rising, I can't bear it.  I shall not know what it isto have another happy hour, unless I can make them rise myself.Then she looked at him so terribly that a shudder ran overhim, and said, go at once.  I wish to be like unto God.  Alas,wife, said the man, falling on his knees before her, the floundercannot do that.  He can make an emperor and a pope.  I beseechyou, go on as you are, and be pope.  Then she fell into arage, and her hair flew wildly about her head, she tore open herbodice, kicked him with her foot, and screamed, I can't standit, I can't stand it any longer.  Will you go this instant.Then he put on his trousers and ran away like a madman.  Butoutside a great storm was raging, and blowing so hard that hecould scarcely keep his feet.  Houses and trees toppled over,the mountains trembled, rocks rolled into the sea, the sky waspitch black, and it thundered and lightened, and the sea camein with black waves as high as church-towers and mountains, andall with crests of white foam at the top.  Then he cried, butcould not hear his own words,          flounder, flounder in the sea,          come, I pray thee, here to me.          For my wife, good ilsabil,          wills not as I'd have her will.Well, what does she want, now, said the flounder.  Alas, saidhe, she wants to be like unto God.  Go to her, and you willfind her back again in the pig-stye.  And there they are stillliving to this day.Once upon a time a mouse, a bird, and a sausage becamecompanions, kept house together, lived well and happily inpeace, and wonderfully increased their possessions.  Thebird's work was to fly every day into the forest and bringback wood.  The mouse had to carry water, light the fire, andlay the table, but the sausage had to cook.He who is too well off is always longing for something new.  Oneday the bird met with another bird, to whom it related itsexcellent circumstances and boasted of them.  The otherbird, however, called it a poor simpleton for his hard work,but said that the two at home had good times.  For when themouse had made her fire and carried her water, she wentinto her little room to rest until they called her to laythe table.  The sausage stayed by the pot, saw that the foodwas cooking well, and, when it was nearly time for dinner,it rolled itself once or twice through the broth or vegetablesand then they were buttered, salted, and ready.  When the birdcame home and laid his burden down, they sat down to dinner,and after they had had their meal, they slept their fill tillnext morning, and that was a splendid life.Next day the bird, prompted by the other bird, would go nomore into the wood, saying that he had been servant longenough, and had been made a fool of by them, and that theymust change about for once, and try to arrange it in anotherway.  And, though the mouse and the sausage also beggedmost earnestly, the bird would have his way, and said it mustbe tried.  They cast lots about it, and the lot fell onthe sausage who was to carry wood, the mouse became cook,and the bird was to fetch water.What happened.  The little sausage went out towards the wood,the little bird lighted the fire, the mouse stayed by thepot and waited alone until little sausage came home andbrought wood for next day.  But the little sausage stayed solong on the road that they both feared something was amiss,and the bird flew out a little way in the air to meet it.Not far off, however, it met a dog on the road who had fallenon the poor sausage as lawful booty, and had seized andswallowed it.  The bird charged the dog with an act ofbare-faced robbery, but words were useless, for the dog saidhe had found forged letters on the sausage, on which accountits life was forfeited to him.The bird sadly took up the wood, flew home, and related whathe had seen and heard.  They were much troubled, but agreedto do their best and remain together.  The bird thereforelaid the table, and the mouse made ready the food, and wantedto dress it, and toget into the pot as the sausage used to do, and roll andcreep amongst the vegetables to mix them.  But before shegot into the midst of them she was stopped, and lost herskin and hair and life in the attempt.When the bird came to carry in the dinner, no cook wasthere.  In its distress the bird threw the wood here and there,called and searched, but no cook was to be found.  Owing to hiscarelessness the wood caught fire, so that a conflagrationbroke out.  The bird hastened to fetch water, but the bucketdropped into the well, and he fell in with it, and could notrecover himself, but had to drown there.A certain man had a donkey, which had carried the corn-sacksto the mill indefatigably for many a long year.  But hisstrength was going, and he was growing more and more unfitfor work.  Then his master began to consider how he mightbest save his keep.  But the donkey, seeing that no good windwas blowing, ran away and set out on the road to bremen.  There,he thought, I can surely be a town-musician.  When he had walkedsome distance, he found a hound lying on the road, gasping likeone who had run till he was tired.  What are you gasping so for,you big fellow, asked the donkey.Ah, replied the hound, as I am old, and daily grow weaker, andno longer can hunt, my master wanted to kill me, so I took toflight, but now how am I to earn my bread.I tell you what, said the donkey, I am going to bremen, andshall be town-musician there.  Go with me and engage yourselfalso as a musician.  I will play the lute, and you shall beatthe kettle-drum.The hound agreed, and on they went.Before long they came to a cat, sitting on the path, with a facelike three rainy days.  Now then, old shaver, what has goneaskew with you, asked the donkey.Who can be merry when his neck is in danger, answered the cat.Because I am now getting old, and my teeth are worn tostumps, and I prefer to sit by the fire and spin, rather thanhunt about after mice, my mistress wanted to drown me, so Iran away.  But now good advice is scarce.  Where am I to go.Go with us to bremen.  You understand night-music, youcan be a town-musician.The cat thought well of it, and went with them.  After this thethree fugitives came to a farm-yard, where the cock was sittingupon the gate, crowing with all his might.  Your crow goesthrough and through one, said the donkey.  What is the matter.I have been foretelling fine weather, because it is the day onwhich our lady washes the christ-child's little shirts, andwants to dry them, said the cock.  But guests are coming forsunday, so the housewife has no pity, and has told the cook thatshe intends to eat me in the soup to-morrow, and this eveningI am to have my head cut off.  Now I am crowing at the top ofmy lungs while still I can.Ah, but red-comb, said the donkey, you had better come awaywith us.  We are going to bremen.  You can find something betterthan death everywhere.  You have a good voice, and if we makemusic together it must have some quality.The cock agreed to this plan, and all four went on together.They could not reach the city of bremen in one day, however,and in the evening they came to a forest where they meant topass the night.  The donkey and the hound laid themselves downunder a large tree, the cat and the cock settled themselves inthe branches.  But the cock flew right to the top, where he wasmost safe.  Before he went to sleep he looked round on all foursides, and thought he saw in the distance a little spark burning.So he called out to his companions that there must be a housenot far off, for he saw a light.  The donkey said, if so, wehad better get up and go on, for the shelter here is bad.  Thehound thought too that a few bones with some meat on would dohim good.So they made their way to the place where the light was, andsoon saw it shine brighter and grow larger, until they came toa well-lighted robbers, house.  The donkey, as the biggest, wentto the window and looked in.What do you see, my grey-horse, asked the cock.  What do Isee, answered the donkey.  A table covered with good things toeat and drink, and robbers sitting at it enjoying themselves.That would be the sort of thing for us, said the cock.  Yes,yes.  Ah, if only we were there, said the donkey.Then the animals took counsel together how they should manageto drive away the robbers, and at last they thought of a plan.The donkey was to place himself with his fore-feet upon thewindow-ledge, the hound was to jump on the donkey's back, thecat was to climb upon the dog, and lastly the cock was to flyup and perch upon the head of the cat.When this was done, at a given signal, they began to performtheir music together.  The donkey brayed, the hound barked,the cat mewed, and the cock crowed.  Then they burst through thewindow into the room, shattering the glass.  At this horrible din,the robbers sprang up, thinking no otherwise than that a ghosthad come in, and fled in a great fright out into the forest.  Thefour companions now sat down at the table, well content withwhat was left, and ate as if they were going to fast for amonth.As soon as the four minstrels had done, they put out the light,and each sought for himself a sleeping-place according to hisnature and what suited him.  The donkey laid himself down uponsome straw in the yard, the hound behind the door, the cat uponthe hearth near the warm ashes, and the cock perched himselfupon a beam of the roof.  And being tired from their long walk,they soon went to sleep.When it was past midnight, and the robbers saw from afar thatthe light was no longer burning in their house, and all appearedquiet, the captain said, we ought not to have let ourselvesbe frightened out of our wits, and ordered one of them to goand examine the house.The messenger finding all still, went into the kitchen to lighta candle, and, taking the glistening fiery eyes of the cat forlive coals, he held a lucifer-match to them to light it.  Butthe cat did not understand the joke, and flew in his face, spittingand scratching.  He was dreadfully frightened, and ran to theback-door, but the dog, who lay there sprang up and bit hisleg.  And as he ran across the yard by the dunghill, the donkeygave him a smart kick with its hind foot.  The cock, too, who hadbeen awakened by the noise, and had become lively, cried downfrom the beam, cock-a-doodle-doo.Then the robber ran back as fast as he could to his captain, andsaid, ah, there is a horrible witch sitting in the house, whospat on me and scratched my face with her long claws.  And bythe door stands a man with a knife, who stabbed me in the leg.And in the yard there lies a black monster, who beat me witha wooden club.  And above, upon the roof, sits the judge, whocalled out, bring the rogue here to me.  So I got away as wellas I could.After this the robbers never again dared enter the house.But it suited the four musicians of bremen so well that theydid not care to leave it any more.  And the mouth of him wholast told this story is still warm.A louse and a flea kept house together and were brewing beerin an egg-shell.  Then the little louse fell in and burntherself.  At this the little flea began to scream loudly. Thensaid the little room-door, little flea, why are you screaming.Because the louse has burnt herself.Then the little door began to creak.  At this a little broom inthe corner said, why are you creaking, little door.  Have I notreason to creak.          The little louse has burnt herself,          the little flea is weeping.So the little broom began to sweep frantically.  Then a little cartpassed by and said, why are you sweeping, little broom.  HaveI not reason to sweep.          The little louse has burnt herself,          the little flea is weeping,          the little door is creaking.So the little cart said, then I will run, and began to run likemad.  Then said the ash-heap by which it ran, why are you runningso, little cart.  Have I not reason to run.          The little louse has burnt herself,          the little flea is weeping,          the little door is creaking,          the little broom is sweeping.The ash-heap said, then I will burn furiously, and began to burnin clear flames.  A little tree stood near the ash-heap andsaid, ash-heap, why are you burning.  Have I not reason to burn.          The little louse has burnt herself,          the little flea is weeping,          the little door is creaking,          the little broom is sweeping,          the little cart is running.The little tree said, then I will shake myself, and began toshake herself so that all her leaves fell off.  A girl who cameup with her water-pitcher saw that, and said, little tree, why areyou shaking yourself.  Have I not reason to shake myself.          The little louse has burnt herself,          the little flea is weeping,          the little door is creaking,          the little broom is sweeping,          the little cart is running,          the little ash-heap is burning.At this the girl said, then I will break my little water-pitcher.And she broke her little water-pitcher.  Then said the littlespring from which ran the water, girl, why are you breaking yourwater-pitcher.  Have I not reason to break my water-pitcher.          The little louse has burnt herself,          the little flea is weeping,          the little door is creaking,          the little broom is sweeping,          the little cart is running,          the little ash-heap is burning,          the little tree is shaking itself.Oh, ho, said the spring, then I will begin to flow, and beganto flow violently.  And in the water everything was drowned,the girl, the little tree, the little ash-heap, the littlecart, the broom, the little door, the little flea, the littlelouse, all together.One very fine day it came to pass that the good God wished to enjoyhimself in the heavenly garden, and took all the apostles and saintswith him, so that no one stayed in heaven but saint peter.  The Lordhad commanded him to let no one in during his absence, so peterstood by the door and kept watch.Before long someone knocked.  Peter asked who was there, and whathe wanted.  I am a poor, honest tailor who prays for admission,replied a smooth voice.  Honest indeed, said peter, like the thiefon the gallows.  You have been light-fingered and have snippedfolks, clothes away.  You will not get into heaven.  The Lord hasforbidden me to let anyone in while he is out.  Come, do bemerciful, cried the tailor.  Little scraps which fall off the tableof their own accord are not stolen, and are not worth speakingabout.  Look, I am lame, and have blisters on my feet from walkinghere, I cannot possibly turn back again.  Just let me in, and I willdo all the dirty work.  I will carry the children, and wash theirclothes, and scrub and clean the benches on which they have beenplaying, and patch all their torn frocks.  Saint peter let himselfbe moved by pity, and opened the door of heaven just wide enough forthe lame tailor to slip his lean body in.  He was forced to sit downin a corner behind the door, and told to stay quietly and peaceablythere, in order that the Lord, when he returned, might not observehim and be angry.  The tailor obeyed, but once when saint peter wentoutside the door, he got up, and full of curiosity, peeped intoevery corner of heaven, and inspected the arrangement of the wholeplace.  At length he came to a spot where many beautiful andprecious chairs were standing, and in the midst was a seat all ofgold which was set with shining jewels.  Likewise it was much higherthan the other chairs, and a footstool of gold was before it.  Itwas the seat, however, on which the Lord sat when he was at home,and from which he could see all that happened on earth.  The tailorstood still, and looked at the seat for a long time, for it pleasedhim better than all else.  At last he could master his curiosity nolonger, and climbed up and seated himself in the chair.  Then he saweverything which was happening on earth, and observed an ugly oldwoman who was standing washing by the side of a stream, secretlylaying two veils on one side for herself.  The sight of thismade the tailor so angry that he laid hold of the golden footstool,and threw it down to earth through heaven, at the old thief.  Butsince he could not bring the stool back again, he slipped quietlyout of the chair, seated himself in his place behind the door, andbehaved as if he had never stirred from the spot.When the Lord and master returned again with his heavenlycompanions,he did not see the tailor behind the door, but when he seatedhimself on his chair the footstool was missing.  He asked saintpeter what had become of the stool, but he did not know.  Then heasked if he had let anyone come in.  I know of no one who has beenhere, answered peter, but a lame tailor, who is stillsitting behind the door.  Then the Lord had the tailor broughtbefore him, and asked him if he had taken away the stool, and wherehe had put it.  Oh, Lord, answered the tailor joyously, I threw itin my anger down to earth at an old woman whom I saw stealing twoveils at the washing.  Oh, you knave, said the Lord, were I tojudge as you judge, how do you think you could have escaped so long.I should long ago have had no chairs, benches, seats, nay, not evenan oven-fork, but should have thrown everything down at the sinners.Henceforth you can stay no longer in heaven, but must go outside thedoor again.  Then go where you will.  No one shall give punishmenthere, but I alone, the Lord.Peter was obliged to take the tailor out of heaven again, and ashe had torn shoes, and feet covered with blisters, he took a stickin his hand, and went to wait-a-while, where the good soldiers sitand make merry.There was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails, whobelieved that his wife was not faithful to him, and wished toput her to the test.  He stretched himself out under the bench,did not move a limb, and behaved as if he were stone dead.Mrs. Fox went up to her room, shut herself in, and her maid, misscat, sat by the fire, and did the cooking.  When it became knownthat the old fox was dead, suitors presented themselves.  Themaid heard someone standing at the house-door, knocking.  Shewent and opened it, and it was a young fox, who said,     what may you be about, miss cat.     Do you sleep or do you wake.She answered,     I am not sleeping, I am waking,     would you know what I am making.     I am boiling warm beer with butter,     will you be my guest for supper.No, thank you, miss, said the fox, what is mrs. Fox doing.The maid replied,     she is sitting in her room,     moaning in her gloom,     weeping her little eyes quite red,     because old mr. Fox is dead.Do just tell her, miss, that a young fox is here, who would liketo woo her.  Certainly, young  sir.     The cat goes up the stairs trip, trap,     the door she knocks at tap, tap, tap,     mistress fox, are you inside.     Oh, yes, my little cat, she cried.     A wooer he stands at the door out there.     What does he look like, my dear.Has he nine as beautiful tails as the late mr. Fox.  Oh, no,answered the cat, he has only one.  Then I will not have him.Miss cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away.  Soon afterwardsthere was another knock, and another fox was at the door whowished to woo mrs. Fox.  He had two tails, but he did not farebetter than the first.  After this still more came, each with onetail more than the other, but they were all turned away, untilat last one came who had nine tails, like old mr. Fox.  When thewidow heard that, she said joyfully to the cat,     now open the gates and doors all wide,     and carry old mr. Fox outside.But just as the wedding was going to be solemnized, old mr. Foxstirred under the bench, and cudgeled all the rabble, and drovethem and mrs. Fox out of the house.When old mr. Fox was dead, the wolf came as a suitor, and knockedat the door, and the cat who was servant to mrs. Fox, opened itfor him.  The wolf greeted her and said,     good day, mrs. Cat of kehrewit,     how comes it that alone you sit.     What are you making good.The cat replied,     in milk I'm breaking bread so sweet,     will you be my guest, and eat.No, thank you, mrs. Cat, answered the wolf.  Is mrs. Fox notat home.The cat said,     she sits upstairs in her room,     bewailing her sorrowful doom,     bewailing her trouble so sore,     for old mr. Fox is no more.The wolf answered,     if she's in want of a husband now,     then will it please her to step below.     The cat runs quickly up the stair,     and lets her tail fly here and there,     until she comes to the parlor door.     With her five gold rings at the door she knocks,     are you within, good mistress fox.     If you're in want of a husband now,     then will it please you to step below.Mrs. Fox asked, has the gentleman red stockings on, and has he apointed mouth.  No, answered the cat.  Then he won't do for me.When the wolf was gone, came a dog, a stag, a hare, a bear, a lion,and all the beasts of the forest, one after the other.  But oneof the good qualities which old mr. Fox had possessed, was alwayslacking, and the cat had continually to send the suitors away.At length came a young fox.  Then mrs. Fox said, has thegentleman red stockings on, and has he a little pointed mouth.Yes, said the cat, he has.  Then let him come upstairs, saidmrs. Fox, and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding feast.     Sweep me the room as clean as you can,     up with the window, fling out my old man.     For many a fine fat mouse he brought,     yet of his wife he never thought,     but ate up every one he caught.Then the wedding was solemnized with young mr. Fox, and there wasmuch rejoicing and dancing, and if they have not left off, theyare dancing still.A shoemaker, by no fault of his own, had become so poor that atlast he had nothing left but leather for one pair of shoes.  So inthe evening, he cut out the shoes which he wished to begin tomake the next morning, and as he had a good conscience, he laydown quietly in his bed, commended himself to God, and fellasleep.  In the morning, after he had said his prayers, and wasjust going to sit down to work, the two shoes stood quite finishedon his table.  He was astounded, and knew not what to think.  Hetook the shoes in his hands to observe them closer, and they wereso neatly made, with not one bad stitch in them, that it was justas if they were intended as a masterpiece.  Before long, a buyercame in, and as the shoes pleased him so well, he paid more forthem than was customary, and, with the money, the shoemaker wasable to purchase leather for two pairs of shoes.  He cut them outat night, and next morning was about to set to work with freshcourage, but he had no need to do so for, when he got up, theywere already made, and buyers also were not wanting, who gavehim money enough to buy leather for four pairs of shoes.  Againthe following morning he found the pairs made, and so it went onconstantly, what he cut out in the evening was finished by themorning, so that he soon had his honest independence again, andat last became a wealthy man.Now it befell that one evening not long before christmas, whenthe man had been cutting out, he said to his wife, before going tobed, what think you if we were to stay up to-night to see who itis that lends us this helping hand.  The woman liked the idea,and lighted a candle, and then they hid themselves in a corner ofthe room, behind some clothes which were hanging up there, andwatched.  When it was midnight, two pretty little naked men came,sat down by the shoemaker's table, took all the work which wascut out before them and began to stitch, and sew, and hammer soskilfully and so quickly with their little fingers that theshoemaker could not avert his eyes for astonishment.  They didnot stop until all was done, and stood finished on the table,and they ran quickly away.Next morning the woman said, the little men have made us rich,and we really must show that we are grateful for it.  They runabout so, and have nothing on, and must be cold.  I'll tell youwhat I'll do, I will make them little shirts, and coats, andvests, and trousers, and knit both of them a pair of stockings,and you make them two little pairs of shoes.  The man said, I shallbe very glad to do it.  And one night, when everything was ready,they laid their presents all together on the table instead ofthe cut-out work, and then concealed themselves to see how thelittle men would behave.  At midnight they came bounding in, andwanted to get to work at once, but as they did not find anyleather cut out, but only the pretty little articles of clothing,they were at first astonished, and then they showed intensedelight.  They dressed themselves with the greatest rapidity, puton the beautiful clothes, and sang,     now we are boys so fine to see,     why should we longer cobblers be.Then they danced and skipped and leapt over chairs and benches.At last they danced out of doors.  From that time forth theycame no more, but as long as the shoemaker lived all went wellwith him, and all his efforts prospered.There were once a cock and a hen who wanted to take a journeytogether.  So the cock built a beautiful carriage, which had fourred wheels, and harnessed four mice to it.  The hen seated herselfin it with the cock, and they drove away together.  Not longafterwards they met a cat who said, where are you going.  Thecock replied, we are going to the house of herr korbes.  Take mewith you, said the cat.  The cock answered, most willingly, getup behind, lest you fall off in front.Take great care not to dirty my little red wheels.  And you littlewheels, roll on, and you little mice pipe out, as we go forth onour way to the house of herr korbes.After this came a millstone, then an egg, then a duck, then a pin,and at last a needle, who all seated themselves in the carriage,and drove with them.  When they reached the house of herr korbes,however, herr korbes was not there.  The mice drew the carriageinto the barn, the hen flew with the cock upon a perch.  The catsat down by the hearth, the duck on the well-pole.  The egg rolleditself into a towel, the pin stuck itself into the chair-cushion,the needle jumped on to the bed in the middle of the pillow, andthe millstone laid itself over the door.  Then herr korbes camehome, went to the hearth, and was about to light the fire, whenthe cat threw a quantity of ashes in his face.  He ran into thekitchen in a great hurry to wash it off, and the duck splashed somewater in his face.  He wanted to dry it with the towel, but theegg rolled up against him, broke, and glued up his eyes.  Hewanted to rest, and sat down in the chair, and then the pinpricked him.  He fell in a passion, and threw himself on his bed,but as soon as he laid his head on the pillow, the needle prickedhim, so that he screamed aloud, and was just going to run outinto the wide world in his rage, but when he came to thehouse-door, the millstone fell down and struck him dead.  Herrkorbes must have been a very wicked man.A sheep-dog had not a good master, but, on the contrary, one wholet him suffer hunger.  As he could stay no longer with him, hewent quite sadly away.  On the road he met a sparrow who said,brother dog, why are you so sad.  The dog replied, I am hungry,and have nothing to eat.  Then said the sparrow, dear brother,come into the town with me, and I will satisy your hunger.  Sothey went into the town together, and when they came in frontof a butcher's shop the sparrow said to the dog, stay there, andI will pick a bit of meat down for you, and he alighted on thestall, looked about him to see that no one was observing him,and pecked and pulled and tore so long at a piece which lay onthe edge, that it slipped down.  Then the dog seized it, ran intoa corner, and devoured it.  The sparrow said, now come with meto another shop, and then I will get you one more piece thatyou may be satisfied.  When the dog had devoured the second pieceas well, the sparrow asked, brother dog, have you now had enough.Yes, I have had meat enough, he answered, but I have had nobread yet.  Said the sparrow, you shall have that also, comewith me.  Then he took him to a baker's shop, and pecked at acouple of little buns till they rolled down, and as the dogwanted still more, he led him to another stall, and again gotbread for him.  When that was consumed, the sparrow said, brotherdog, have you now had enough.  Yes, he replied, now we will walkawhile outside the town.Then they both went out on to the highway.  The weather was warm,however, and when they had walked a little way the dog said, I amtired, and would like to sleep.  Well, do sleep, answered thesparrow, and in the meantime I will seat myself on a branch.  Sothe dog lay down on the road, and fell fast asleep.  Whilst he laysleeping there, a waggoner came driving by, who had a cart withthree horses, laden with two barrels of wine.  The sparrow,however, saw that he was not going to turn aside, but was stayingin the wheel track in which the dog was lying, so it cried,waggoner, don't do it, or I will make you poor.  But thewaggoner growled to himself, you will not make me poor, andcracked his whip and drove the cart over the dog, and the wheelskilled him.  Then the sparrow cried, you have run over my brotherdog and killed him, it shall cost you your cart and horses.  Cartand horses indeed, said the waggoner.  What harm can you do me.And drove onwards.  Then the sparrow crept under the cover of thecart, and pecked so long at the same bung-hole that he got thebung out, and then all the wine ran out without the drivernoticing it.  But once when he was looking behind him he saw thatthe cart was dripping, and looked at the barrels and saw that oneof them was empty.  Unfortunate fellow that am I, cried he.  Notunfortunate enough yet, said the sparrow, and flew on to the headof one of the horses and pecked his eyes out.  When the driversaw that, he drew out his axe and wanted to hit the sparrow, butthe sparrow flew into the air, and he hit his horse on the headand it fell down dead.  Oh, what an unfortunate man am I, criedhe.  Not unfortunate enough yet, said the sparrow, and when thedriver drove on with the two hoses, the sparrow again creptunder the cover, and pecked the bung out of the second cask, soall the wine was spilt.  When the driver became aware of it, heagain cried, oh, what an unfortunate man am I.  But the sparrowreplied, not unfortunate enough yet, and seated himself on thehead of the second horse, and pecked his eyes out.  The driverran up to it and raised his axe to strike, but the sparrow flewinto the air and the blow struck the horse, which fell.  Oh, whatan unfortunate man am I.  Not unfortunate enough yet, said thesparrow, and lighted on the third horse's head, and pecked outhis eyes.  The driver, in his rage, struck at the sparrow withoutlooking round, and did not hit him but killed his third horselikewise.  Oh, what an unfortunate man am I, cried he.Not unfortunate enoughyet, answered the sparrow.  Now will I make you unfortunate inyour home, and flew away.The driver had to leave the waggon standing, and full of angerand vexation went home.  Ah, said he to his wife, what misfortunesI have had.  My wine has run out, and the horses are all threedead.  Alas, husband, she answered, what a malicious bird hascome into the house.  It has gathered together every bird thereis in the world, and they have fallen on our corn up there, andare devouring it.  Then he went upstairs, and thousands andthousands of birds were sitting in the loft and had eaten up allthe corn, and the sparrow was sitting in the midst of them.Then the driver cried, oh, what an unfortunate man am I.Not unfortunate enough yet, answered the sparrow, waggoner, itshall cost you your life as well, and flew out.Then the waggoner had lost all his property, and he wentdownstairs into the room, sat down behind the stove and was quitefurious and bitter.  But the sparrow sat outside in front of thewindow, and cried, waggoner, it shall cost you your life.  Thenthe waggoner snatched the axe and threw it at the sparrow, but itonly broke the window, and did not hit the bird.  The sparrownow hopped in, placed itself on the stove and cried, waggoner, itshall cost you your life.  The latter, quite mad and blind withrage, smote the stove in twain, and as the sparrow flew from oneplace to another so it fared with all his household furniture,looking-glass, benches, table, and at last the walls of his house,and yet he could not hit the bird.  At length, however, he caughtit with his hand.  Then his wife said, shall I kill it.  No, criedhe, that would be too merciful.  It shall die much more cruelly.And he took it and swallowed it whole.  The sparrow, however,began to flutter about in his body, and fluttered up again intothe man's mouth, then it stretched out its head, and cried,waggoner, it shall still cost you your life.  The driver gavethe axe to his wife, and said, wife, kill the bird in my mouthfor me.  The woman struck, but missed her blow, and hit thewaggoner square on his head, so that he fell dead.  But thesparrow flew up and away.There was once upon a time a man who was called frederickand a woman called catherine, who had married each otherand lived together as young married folks.  One dayfrederick said, I will now go and plough, catherine, whenI come back, there must be some roast meat on the table forhunger, and a fresh draught for thirst.  Just go, frederick,answered kate, just go, I will have all ready for you.  So whendinner-time drew near she got a sausage out of the chimney, putit in the frying-pan, put some butter to it, and set it on thefire.  The sausage began to fry and to hiss, catherine stoodbeside it and held the handle of the pan, and had her ownthoughts as she was doing it.  Then it occurred to her, whilethe sausage is getting done you could go into the cellar and drawbeer.  So she set the frying-pan safely on the fire, took a can,and went down into the cellar to draw beer.  The beer raninto the can and kate watched it, and then she thought, oh,dear.  The dog upstairs is not fastened up, it might get thesausage out of the pan.  Lucky I thought of it.  And in a triceshe was up the cellar-steps again, but the spitz had the sausagein its mouth already, and trailed it away on the ground.  Butcatherine, who was not idle, set out after it, and chased it along way into the field, the dog, however, was swifter thancatherine and did not let the sausage go, but skipped overthe furrows with it.  What's gone is gone, said kate, andturned round, and as she had run till she was weary, she walkedquietly and comfortably, and cooled herself.  During this timethe beer was still running out of the cask, for kate had notturned the tap.  And when the can was full and there was noother place for it, it ran into the cellar and did not stop untilthe whole cask was empty.  As soon as kate was on the steps shesaw the accident.  Goodgracious, she cried.  What shall I do now to stop frederickfinding out.  She thought for a while, and at last she rememberedthat up in the garret was still standing a sack of the finestwheat flour from the last fair, and she would fetch that down andstrew it over the beer.  Yes, said she, he who saves a thingwhen he ought, has it afterwards when he needs it, and she climbedup to the garret and carried the sack below, and threw it straightdown on the can of beer, which she knocked over, and frederick'sdraught swam also in the cellar.  It is all right, said kate,where the one is the other ought to be also, and she strewedthe meal over the whole cellar.  When it was done she was heartilydelighted with her work, and said, how clean and wholesome it doeslook here.  At mid-day home came frederick, now, wife, whathave you ready for me.  Ah, freddy, she answered, I was fryinga sausage for you, but whilst I was drawing the beer to drinkwith it, the dog took it away out of the pan, and whilst I wasrunning after the dog, all the beer ran out, and whilst I wasdrying up the beer with the flour, I knocked over the can aswell, but be easy, the cellar is quite dry again.  Saidfrederick, kate, kate, you should not have done that, to letthe sausage be carried off and the beer run out of the cask,and throw out all our flour into the bargain.  Well, frederick,I did not know that, you should have told me.  The man thought,if this is the kind of wife I have, I had better take more careof things.  Now he had saved up a good number of talerswhich he changed into gold, and said to catherine, look,these are yellow counters for playing games, I will putthem in a pot and bury them in the stable under the cow's manger,but mind you keep away from them, or it will be the worse foryou.  Said she, oh, no, frederick, I certainly will not gonear them.  And when frederick was gone some pedlars came intothe village who had cheap earthen bowls and pots, and askedthe young woman if there was nothing she wanted to bargain withthem for.  Oh, dear people, said catherine, I have no moneyand can buy nothing, but if you have any use for yellowcounters I will buy of you.  Yellow counters, why not.  Butjust let us see them.  Then go into the stable anddig under the cow's manger, and you will find the yellowcounters.  I am not allowed to go there.  The rogues wentthither, dug and found pure gold.  Then they laid hold of it,ran away, and left their pots and bowls behind in the house.Catherine though she must use her new things, and as she hadno lack in the kitchen already without these, she knocked thebottom out of every pot, and set them all as ornaments on thepaling which went round about the house.  When frederick cameand saw the new decorations, he said, catherine, what have youbeen about.  I have bought them, frederick, for the counterswhich were under the cow's manger.  I did not go there myself,the pedlars had to dig them out for themselves.  Ah, wife,said frederick, what have you done.  Those were not counters,but pure gold, and all our wealth, you should not have done that.Indeed, frederick, said she, I did not know that, you shouldhave forewarned me.Catherine stood for a while and wondered, then she said,listen, frederick, we will soon get the gold back again, wewill run after the thieves.  Come, then, said frederick, wewill try it, but take with you some butter and cheese that we mayhave something to eat on the way.  Yes, frederick, I will takethem.  They set out, and as frederick was the better walker,catherine followed him.  It is to my advantage, thought she,when we turn back I shall be a little way in advance.  Thenshe came to a hill where there were deep ruts on both sidesof the road.  There one can see, said catherine, how theyhave torn and skinned and galled the poor earth, it will neverbe whole again as long as it lives, and in her heart'scompassion she took her butter and smeared the ruts rightand left, that they might not be so hurt by the wheels, and asshe was thus bending down in her charity, one of the cheesesrolled out of her pocket down the hill.  Said catherine, Ihave made my way once up here, I will not go down again, anothermay run and fetch it back.  So she took another cheese and rolledit down.  But the cheeses did not come back, so she let a thirdrun down, thinking.  Perhaps they are waiting for company, anddo not like to walk alone.  As all three stayed away she said,I do not know what thatcan mean, but it may perhaps be that the third has not foundthe way, and has gone wrong, I will just send the fourth tocall it.  But the fourth did no better than the third.  Thencatherine was angry, and threw down the fifth and sixth aswell, and these were her last.  She remained standing for sometime watching for their coming, but when they still did not come,she said, oh, you are good folks to send in search of death,you stay a fine long time away.  Do you think I will wait anylonger for you.  I shall go my way, you may run after me,you have younger legs than I.  Catherine went on and foundfrederick, who was standing waiting for her because he wantedsomething to eat.  Now just let us have what you have broughtwith you, said he.  She gave him the dry bread.  Where haveyou the butter and the cheeses, asked the man.  Ah, freddy,said catherine, I smeared the cart-ruts with the butter andthe cheeses will come soon, one ran away from me, so I sentthe others after to call it.  Said frederick, you should nothave done that, catherine, to smear the butter on the road,and let the cheeses run down the hill.  Really, frederick,you should have told me.Then they ate the dry bread together, and frederick said,catherine, did you make the house safe when you came away.No, frederick, you should have told me to do it before.  Thengo home again, and make the house safe before we go any farther,and bring with you something else to eat.  I will wait herefor you.  Catherine went back and thought, frederick wantssomething more to eat, he does not like butter and cheese, so Iwill take with me a handkerchief full of dried pears anda pitcher of vinegar for him to drink.  Then she bolted theupper half of the door fast, but unhinged the lower door, andtook it on her back, believing that when she had placed thedoor in security the house must be well taken care of.  Catherinetook her time on the way, and thought, frederick will resthimself so much the longer.  When she had once reached him shesaid, here is the house-door for you, frederick, and now youcan take care of the house yourself.  Oh, heavens, said he, whata wise wife I have.  She takes the under-dooroff the hinges that everything may run in, and bolts theupper one.  It is now too late to go back home again, butsince you have brought the door here, you shall just carry itfarther.  I will carry the door, frederick, but the dried pearsand the vinegar-jug will be too heavy for me, I will hang themon the door, it may carry them.And now they went into the forest, and sought the rogues, butdid not find them.  At length as it grew dark they climbed intoa tree and resolved to spend the night there.  Scarcely, however,had they sat down at the top of it than the rascals came thitherwho carry away with them what does not want to go, and findthings before they are lost.  They sat down under the very treein which frederick and catherine were sitting, lighted a fire,and were about to share their booty.  Frederick got down on theother side and collectedsome stones together.  Then he climbed up again with them, andwished to throw them at the thieves and kill them.  The stones,however, did not hit them, and the knaves cried, it will soonbe morning, the wind is shaking down the fir-cones.  Catherinestill had the door on her back, and as it pressed so heavily onher, she thought it was the fault of the dried pears, and said,frederick, I must throw the pears down.  No, catherine, not now,he replied, they might betray us.  Oh, but, frederick, I must.They weigh me down far too much.  Do it, then, and be hanged.Then the dried pears rolled down between the branches, and therascals below said, those are birds, droppings.A short time afterwards, as the door was still heavy, catherinesaid, ah, frederick, I must pour out the vinegar.  No, catherine,you must not, it might betray us.  Ah, but, frederick, I must,it weighs me down far too much.  Then do it and be hanged.So she emptied out the vinegar, and it spattered over therobbers.  They said amongst themselves, the dew is alreadyfalling.  At length catherine thought, can it really be thedoor which weighs me down so, and said, frederick, I mustthrow the door down.  No, not now, catherine, it might betray us.Oh, but, frederick, I must.  It weighs me down far too much.  Oh,no, catherine, do hold it fast.  Ah, frederick, I am letting itfall.  Let it go, then, in the devil's name.  Then it fell downwith a violent clatter, and the rascals below cried, the devil iscoming down the tree, and they ran away and left everything behindthem.  Early next morning, when the two came down they found alltheir gold again, and carried it home.When they were once more at home, frederick said, and now,catherine, you, too, must be industrious and work.  Yes,frederick, I will soon do that, I will go into the field andcut corn.  When catherine got into the field, she said toherself, shall I eat before I cut, or shall I sleep before Icut.  Oh, I will eat first.  Then catherine ate and eating madeher sleepy, and she began to cut, and half in a dream cut all herclothes to pieces, her apron, her gown, and her shift.  Whencatherine awoke again after a long sleep she was standingthere half-naked, and said to herself, is it I, or is it notI.  Alas, it is not I.  In the meantime night came, and catherineran into the village, knocked at her husband's window, and cried,frederick.What is the matter.  I should very much like to know if catherineis in.  Yes, yes, replied frederick, she must be in and asleep.Said she, that's all right, then I am certainly at home already,and ran away.Outside catherine found some vagabonds who were going to steal.Then she went to them and said, I will help you to steal.  Therascals thought that she knew what opportunities the placeoffered, and were willing.  Catherine went in front of the houses,and cried, good folks, have you anything.  We want to steal.The thieves thought to themselves, that's a fine way of doingthings, and wished themselves once more rid of catherine.  Thenthey said to her, outside the village the pastor has some turnipsin the field.  Go there and pull up some turnips for us.Catherine went to the ground, and began to pull them up, butwas so lazy that she never stood up straight.  Then a man cameby, saw her, and stood still and thought that it was the devilwho was thus rooting amongst the turnips.  He ran away into thevillage to the pastor, and said, mr. Pastor, the devil is inyour turnip-ground, rooting up turnips.  Ah, heavens, answeredthe pastor, I have a lame foot, I cannot go out and drive himaway.  Said the man, then I will carry you on my back, and hecarried him out on his back.  And when they came to the ground,catherine arose and stood up her full height.  Ah, the devil,cried the pastor, and both hurried away, and in his greatfright the pastor could run better with his lame foot than theman who had carried him on his back could do on his sound legs.There was a certain village wherein no one lived but really richpeasants, and just one poor one, whom they called the littlepeasant.  He had not even so much as a cow, and still less moneyto buy one, and yet he and his wife did so wish to have one.  Oneday he said to her, listen, I have a good idea, there is ourgossip the carpenter, he shall make us a wooden calf, and paint itbrown, so that it looks like any other, and in time it willcertainly get big and be a cow.  The woman also liked the idea, andtheir gossip the carpenter cut and planed the calf, and paintedit as it ought to be, and made it with its head hanging down asif it were eating.Next morning when the cows were being driven out, the littlepeasant called the cow-herd and said, look, I have a little calfthere, but it is still small and has to be carried.  The cow-herdsaid, all right, and took it in his arms and carried it to thepasture, and set it among the grass.  The little calf alwaysremained standing like one which was eating, and the cow-herd said,it will soon run by itself, just look how it eats already.  Atnight when he was going to drive the herd home again, he said tothe calf, if you can stand there and eat your fill, you can alsogo on your four legs.  I don't care to drag you home again inmy arms.  But the little peasant stood at his door, and waited forhis little calf, and when the cow-herd drove the cows throughthe village, and the calf wasmissing, he inquired where it was.  The cow-herd answered, it isstill standing out there eating.  It would not stop and comewith us.  But the little peasant said, oh, but I must have mybeast back again.  Then they went back to the meadow together,but someone had stolen the calf, and it was gone.  The cow-herdsaid, it must have run away.  The peasant, however, said, don'ttell me that, and led the cow-herd before the mayor, who for hiscarelessness condemned him to give the peasant a cow for thecalf which had run away.And now the little peasant and his wife had the cow for whichthey had so long wished, and they were heartily glad, but theyhad no food for it, and could give it nothing to eat, so itsoon had to be killed.  They salted the flesh, and the peasant wentinto the town and wanted to sell the skin there, so that he mightbuy a new calf with the proceeds.  On the way he passed by a mill,and there sat a raven with broken wings, and out of pity he tookhim and wrapped him in the skin.  But as the weather grew sobad and there was a storm of rain and wind, he could go no farther,and turned back to the mill and begged for shelter.  The miller'swife was alone in the house, and said to the peasant, lay yourselfon the straw there, and gave him a slice of bread and cheese.  Thepeasant ate it, and lay down with his skin beside him, and thewoman thought, he is tired and has gone to sleep.  In themeantime came the parson.  The miller's wife received him well,and said, my husband is out, so we will have a feast.  Thepeasant listened, and when he heard them talk about feastinghe was vexed that he had been forced to make shift with a sliceof bread and cheese.  Then the woman served up four differentthings, roast meat, salad, cakes, and wine.Just as they were about to sit down and eat, there was a knockingoutside.  The woman said, oh, heavens.  It is my husband.  Shequickly hid the roast meat inside the tiled stove, the wineunder the pillow, the salad on the bed, the cakes under it, andthe parson in the closet on the porch.  Then she opened thedoor for her husband, and said, thank heaven, you are backagain.  There is such a storm, it looks as if the world werecoming to an end.  The millersaw the peasant lying on the straw, and asked, what is thatfellow doing there.  Ah, said the wife, the poor knave came inthe storm and rain, and begged for shelter, so I gave him a bitof bread and cheese, and showed him where the straw was.  The mansaid, I have no objection, but be quick and get me something toeat.  The woman said, but I have nothing but bread and cheese.  Iam contented with anything, replied the husband, so far as I amconcerned, bread and cheese will do, and looked at the peasantand said, come and eat some more with me.  The peasant did notrequire to be invited twice, but got up and ate.  After this themiller saw the skin in which the raven was, lying on the ground,and asked, what have you there.  The peasant answered, I have asoothsayer inside it.  Can he foretell anything to me, said themiller.  Why not, answered the peasant, but he only says fourthings, and the fifth he keeps to himself.  The miller was curious,and said, let him foretell something for once.  Then the peasantpinched the raven's head, so that he croaked and made a noiselike krr, krr.  The miller said, what did he say.  The peasantanswered, in the first place, he says that there is some winehidden under the pillow.  Bless me, cried the miller, and wentthere and found the wine.  Now go on, said he.  The peasantmade the raven croak again, and said, in the second place, hesays that there is some roast meat in the tiled stove.  Upon myword, cried the miller, and went thither, and found the roastmeat.  The peasant made the raven prophesy still more, and said,thirdly, he says that there is some salad on the bed.  Thatwould be a fine thing, cried the miller, and went there and foundthe salad.  At last the peasant pinched the raven once more tillhe croaked, and said, fourthly, he says that there are somecakes under the bed.  That would be a fine thing, cried themiller, and looked there, and found the cakes.And now the two sat down to the table together, but the miller'swife was frightened to death, and went to bed and took all thekeys with her.  The miller would have liked much to know thefifth, but the little peasant said, first, we will quicklyeat the four things, for the fifth is something bad.  So theyate, and after that theybargained how much the miller was to give for the fifth prophesy,until they agreed on three hundred talers.  Then the peasantonce more pinched the raven's head till he croaked loudly.  Themiller asked, what did he say.  The peasant replied, he says thatthe devil is hiding outside there in the closet on the porch.The miller said, the devil must go out, and opened the house-door.Then the woman was forced to give up the keys, and the peasantunlocked the closet.  The parson ran out as fast as he could, andthe miller said, it was true.  I saw the black rascal with my owneyes.  The peasant, however, made off next morning by daybreakwith the three hundred talers.At home the small peasant gradually launched out.  He built abeautiful house, and the peasants said, the small peasant hascertainly been to the place where golden snow falls, and peoplecarry the gold home in shovels.  Then the small peasant wasbrought before the mayor, and bidden to say from whence hiswealth came.  He answered, I sold my cow's skin in the town, forthree hundred talers.  When the peasants heard that, they toowished to enjoy this great profit, and ran home, killed all theircows, and stripped off their skins in order to sell them in thetown to the greatest advantage.  The mayor, however, said, butmy servant must go first.  When she came to the merchant in thetown, he did not give her more than two talers for a skin, andwhen the others came, he did not give them so much, and said,what can I do with all these skins.Then the peasants were vexed that the small peasant should havethus outwitted them, wanted to take vengeance on him, and accusedhim of this treachery before the mayor.  The innocent littlepeasant was unanimously sentenced to death, and was to be rolledinto the water, in a barrel pierced full of holes.  He was ledforth, and a priest was brought who was to say a mass for hissoul.  The others were all obliged to retire to a distance, andwhen the peasant looked at the priest, he recognized the man whohad been with the miller's wife.  He said to him, I set you freefrom the closet, set me free from the barrel.  At this samemoment up came, with a flock of sheep, the very shepherd whomthe peasant knew had long been wishing to be mayor, so he criedwith all his might, no, I will not do it.  If the whole worldinsists on it, I will not do it.  The shepherd hearing that,came up to him, and asked, what are you about.  What is it thatyou will not do.  The peasant said, they want to make me mayor,if I will but put myself in the barrel, but I will not do it.The shepherd said, if nothing more than that is needful in orderto be mayor, I would get into the barrel at once.  The peasantsaid, if you will get in, you will be mayor.  The shepherd waswilling, and got in, and the peasant shut the top down on him.Then he took the shepherd's flock for himself, and drove it away.The parson went to the crowd, and declared that the mass hadbeen said.  Then they came and rolled the barrel towards thewater.  When the barrel began to roll, the shepherd cried, I amquite willing to be mayor.  They believed no otherwise than thatit was the peasant who was saying this, and answered, that iswhat we intend, but first you shall look about you a littledown below there, and they rolled the barrel down into the water.After that the peasants went home, and as they were enteringthe village, the small peasant also came quietly in, driving aflock of sheep and looking quite contented.  Then the peasantswere astonished, and said, peasant, from whence do you come.Have you come out of the water.  Yes, truly, replied thepeasant, I sank deep, deep down, until at last I got to the bottom.I pushed the bottom out of the barrel, and crept out, and therewere pretty meadowson which a number of lambs were feeding, and from thence Ibrought this flock away with me.  Said the peasants, are thereany more.  Oh, yes, said he, more than I could want.  Thenthe peasants made up their minds that they too would fetch somesheep for themselves, a flock apiece, but the mayor said, Icome first.  So they went to the water together, and just thenthere were some of the small fleecy clouds in the blue sky, whichare called little lambs, and they were reflected in the water,whereupon the peasants cried, we already see the sheep downbelow.  The mayor pressed forward and said, I will go down first,and look about me, and if things promise well I'll call you.So he jumped in.  Splash, went the water.  It sounded as ifhe were calling them, and the whole crowd plunged in afterhim as one man.  Then the entire village was dead, and thesmall peasant, as sole heir, became a rich man.There was once an old castle in the midst of a large and denseforest, and in it an old woman who was a witch dwelt allalone.  In the day-time she changed herself into a car or ascreech-owl, but in the evening she took her proper shapeagain as a human being.  She could lure wild beasts and birdsto her, and then she killed and boiled and roasted them.  Ifanyone came within one hundred paces of the castle he wasobliged to stand still, and could not stir from the place untilshe bade him be free.  But whenever an innocent maiden camewithin this circle, she changed her into a bird, and shut herup in a wicker-work cage, and carried the cage into a room in thecastle.  She had about seven thousand cages of rare birds inthe castle.Now, there was once a maiden who was called jorinda, who wasfairer than all other girls.  She and a handsome youth namedjoringel had promised to marry each other.  They were still inthe days of betrothal, and their greatest happiness was beingtogether.  One day in order that they might be able to talktogether in peace they went for a walk in the forest.  Takecare, said joringel, that you do not go too near the castle.It was a beautiful evening.  The sun shone brightly betweenthe trunks of the trees into the dark green of the forest, andthe turtle-doves sang mournfully upon the beech trees.Jorinda wept now and then.  She sat down in the sunshine andwas sorrowful.  Joringel was sorrowful too.  They were assad as if they were about to die.  Then they looked around them,and were quite at a loss, for they did not know by which waythey should go home.  The sun was still half above themountain and half under.Joringel looked through the bushes, and saw the old walls of thecastle close at hand.  He was horror-stricken and filled withdeadly fear.  Jorinda was singing,          my little bird, with the necklace red,          sings sorrow, sorrow, sorrow,          he sings that the dove must soon be dead,          sings sorrow, sor - jug, jug, jug.Joringel looked for jorinda.  She was changed into a nightingale,and sang, jug, jug, jug.  A screech-owl with glowing eyesflew three times round about her, and three times cried, to-whoo,to-whoo, to-whoo.Joringel could not move.  He stood there like a stone, andcould neither weep nor speak, nor move hand or foot.The sun had now set.  The owl flew into the thicket, and directlyafterwards there came out of it a crooked old woman, yellowand lean, with large red eyes and a hooked nose, the point ofwhich reached to her chin.  She muttered to herself, caught thenightingale, and took it away in her hand.Joringel could neither speak nor move from the spot.  Thenightingale was gone.  At last the woman came back, and saidin a hollow voice, greet you, zachiel.  If the moon shines onthe cage, zachiel, let him loose at once.  Then joringel wasfreed.  He fell on his knees before the woman and begged thatshe would give him back his jorinda, but she said that heshould never have her again, and went away.  He called, he wept,he lamented, but all in vain, hooh, what is to become of me.Joringel went away, and at last came to a strange village, wherehe kept sheep for a long time.  He often walked round and roundthe castle, but not too near to it.  At last he dreamt onenight that he found a blood-red flower, in the middle ofwhich was a beautiful large pearl.  That he picked the flowerand went with it to the castle, and that everything he touchedwith the flower was freed from enchantment.  He also dreamtthat by means of it he recovered his jorinda.In the morning, when he awoke, he began to seek over hill anddale for such a flower.  He sought until the ninth day, and then,early in the morning, he found the blood-red flower.  In themiddle of it there was a large dew-drop, as big as the finestpearl.Day and night he journeyed with this flower to the castle.  Whenhe was within a hundred paces of it he was not held fast, butwalked on to the door.  Joringel was full of joy.  He touched thedoor with the flower, and it sprang open.  He walked in throughthe courtyard, and listened for the sound of the birds.  Atlast he heard it.  He went on and found the room from whence itcame, and there the witch was feeding the birds in the seventhousand cages.When she saw joringel she was angry, very angry, and scoldedand spat poison and gall at him, but she could not come withintwo paces of him.  He did not take any notice of her, but wentand looked at the cages with the birds.  But there were manyhundred nightingales, how was he to find his jorinda again.Just then he saw the old woman quietly take away a cage witha bird in it, and go towards the door.Swiftly he sprang towards her, touched the cage with the flower,and also the old woman.  She could now no longer bewitch anyone.And jorinda was standing there, clasping him round the neck,and she was as beautiful as ever.  Then all the other birdswere turned into maidens again, and he went home with his jorinda,and they lived happily together for a long time.Once upon a time the fox was talking to the wolf of thestrength of man.  How no animal could withstand him, and howall were obliged to emply cunning in order to protect themselvesfrom him.  Then the wolf answered, if I had but the chance ofseeing a man for once, I would set on him notwithstanding.I can help you to do that, said the fox.  Come to me earlyto-morrow morning, and I will show you one.  The wolf presentedhimself betimes, and the fox took him out on the road by whichthe huntsmen went daily.  First came an old discharged soldier.Is that a man, inquired the wolf.  No, answered the fox, thatwas one.  Afterwards came a little boy who was going to school.Is that a man.  No, that will be one.  At length came ahunter with his double-barelled gun at his back, and hanger byhis side.  Said the fox to the wolf, look, there comes a man,you must attack him, but I will take myself off to my hole.  Thewolf then rushed on the man.  When the huntsman saw him hesaid, it is a pity that I have not loaded with a bullet, aimed,and fired his small shot in his face.  The wolf pulled a verywry grimace, but did not let himself be frightened, and attackedhim again, on which the huntsman gave him the second barrel.  Thewolf swallowed his pain, and rushed on the huntsman, but hedrew out his bright hanger, and gave him a few cuts with itright and left, so that, bleeding everywhere, he ran howling backto the fox.  Well, brother wolf, said the fox, how have yougot on with man.  Ah, replied the wolf, I never imagined thestrength of man to be what it is.  First, he took a stick fromhis shoulder, and blew into it, and then something flew intomy face which tickled me terribly.  Then he breathed oncemore into the stick, and it flew into my nose like lightning andhail.  When I was quite close, he drew a white rib out of hisbody, and he beat me so with it that I was all but left lyingdead.  See what a braggart you are, said the fox.  You throwyour hatchet so far that you cannot fetch it back again.The wolf had the fox with him, and whatsoever the wolfwished, that the fox was compelled to do, for he was theweaker, and he would gladly have been rid of his master.It chanced that once as they were going through the forest, the wolfsaid, red-fox, get me something to eat, or else I will eatyou yourself.  Then the fox answered, I know a farm-yard wherethere are two young lambs.  If you are inclined, we will fetch oneof them.  That suited the wolf, and they went thither, and the foxstole the little lamb, took it to the wolf, and went away.  Thewolf devoured it, but was not satisfied with one.  He wanted theother as well, and went to get it.  But as he did it so clumsily,the mother of the little lamb heard him, and began to cry outterribly, and to bleat so that the farmers came running there.They found the wolf, and beat him so mercilessly, that he wentto the fox limping and howling.  You have misled me finely, saidhe.  I wanted to fetch the other lamb, and the country folkssurprised me, and have beaten me to a jelly.  The fox replied,why are you such a glutton.Next day they again went into the country, and the greedy wolfonce more said, red-fox, get me something to eat, or I willeat you yourself.  Then answered the fox, I know a farm-housewhere the wife is baking pancakes to-night.  We will get someof them for ourselves.  They went there, and the fox slippedround the house, and peeped and sniffed about until he discoveredwhere the dish was, and then snatched six pancakes and carriedthem to the wolf.There is something for you to eat, said he to him, and then wenthis way.  The wolf swallowed down the pancakes in an instant,and said, they make one want more, and went thither and tore thewhole dish down so that it broke in pieces.  This made sucha great noise that the woman came out, and when she saw thewolf she called the people, who hurried there, and beat him aslong as their sticks would hold together, till with two lamelegs, and howling loudly, he returned to the fox in the forest.How abominably you have misled me, cried he, the peasants caughtme, and tanned my skin for me.  But the fox replied, why areyou such a glutton.On the third day, when they were out together, and the wolfcould only limp along painfully, he again said, red-fox, get mesomething to eat, or I will eat your yourself.  The foxanswered, Iknow a man who has been killing, and the salted meat is lyingin a barrel in the cellar.  We will get that.  Said the wolf, Iwill go when you do, that you may help me if I am not able toget away.  I am willing, said the fox, and showed him the by-pathsand ways by which at length they reached the cellar.  There wasmeat in abundance, and the wolf attacked it instantly and thought,there is plenty of time before I need leave off.  The fox likedit also, but looked about everywhere, and often ran to the holeby which they had come in, to find out if his body was stillthin enough to slip through it.  The wolf said, dear fox, tellme why you are running here and there so much, and jumping inand out.I must see that no one is coming, replied the crafty fellow.Don't eat too much.  Then said the wolf, I shall not leave untilthe barrel is empty.  In the meantime the farmer, who had heardthe noise of the fox's jumping, came into the cellar.  When thefox saw him he was out of the hole at one bound.  The wolfwanted to follow him, but he had made himself so fat witheating that he could no longer get through, but stuck fast.  Thencame the farmer with a cudgel and struck him dead, but the foxbounded into the forest, glad to be rid of the old glutton.It happened that the cat met the fox in a forest, and as shethought to herself, he is clever and full of experience, andmuch esteemed in the world, she spoke to him in a friendlyway.  Good-day, dear mr. Fox, how are you.  How is all withyou.  How are you getting on in these hard times.  The fox,full of all kinds of arrogance, looked at the cat from headto foot, and for a long timedid not know whether he would give any answer or not.  At lasthe said, oh, you wretched beard-cleaner, you piebald fool, youhungry mouse-hunter, what can you be thinking of.  Have you thecheek to ask how I am getting on.  What have you learnt.  Howmany arts do you understand.  I understand but one, repliedthe cat, modestly.  What art is that, asked the fox.  Whenthe hounds are following me, I can spring into a tree andsave myself.  Is that all, said the fox.  I am master of ahundred arts, and have into the bargain a sackful of cunning.You make me sorry for you.  Come with me, I will teach youhow people get away from the hounds.  Just then came a hunterwith four dogs.  The cat sprang nimbly up a tree, and satdown on top of it, where the branches and foliage quiteconcealed her.  Open your sack, mr. Fox, open your sack, criedthe cat to him, but the dogs had already seized him, andwere holding him fast.  Ah, mr. Fox, cried the cat.  You withyour hundred arts are left in the lurch.  Had you been ableto climb like me, you would not have lost your life.There was once a cook named Gretel, who wore shoes withred heels, and when she walked out with them on, sheturned herself this way and that, was quite happy andthought, you certainly are a pretty girl.  And when shecame home she drank, in her gladness of heart, a draught ofwine, andas wine excites a desire to eat, she tasted the best of whatevershe was cooking until she was satisfied, and said, the cookmust know what the food is like.It came to pass that the master one day said to her, Gretel,there is a guest coming this evening.  Prepare me two fowlsvery daintily.  I will see to it, master, answered Gretel.She killed two fowls, scalded them, plucked them, put them onthe spit, and towards evening set them before the fire, thatthey might roast.  The fowls began to turn brown, and werenearly ready, but the guest had not yet arrived.  Then Gretelcalled out to her master, if the guest does not come, I musttake the fowls away from the fire, but it will be a sin and ashame if they are not eaten the moment they are at theirjuiciest.  The master said, I will run myself, and fetchthe guest.  When the master had turned his back, Gretel laidthe spit with the fowls on one side, and thought, standingso long by the fire there, makes one sweat and thirsty.  Whoknows when they will come.  Meanwhile, I will run into thecellar, and take a drink.  She ran down, set a jug, said,God bless it for you, Gretel, and took a good drink, andthought that wine should flow on, and should not be interrupted,and took yet another hearty draught.Then she went and put the fowls down again to the fire, bastedthem, and drove the spit merrily round.  But as the roastmeat smelt so good, Gretel thought, something must be wrong,it ought to be tasted.  She touched it with her finger, andsaid, ah, how good fowls are.  It certainly is a sin and ashame that they are not eatenat the right time.  She ran to the window, to see if themaster was not coming with his guest, but she saw no one, andwent back to the fowls and thought, one of the wings is burning.I had better take it off and eat it.  So she cut it off, ate it,and enjoyed it, and when she had done, she thought, the othermust go down too, or else master will observe that something ismissing.  When the two wings were eaten, she went and lookedfor her master, and did not see him.  It suddenly occurred toher, who knows.  They are perhaps not coming at all, and haveturned in somewhere.  Then she said, well, Gretel, enjoyyourself, one fowl has been cut into, take another drink, andeat it up entirely.  When it is eaten you will have some peace,why should God's good gifts be spoilt.  So she raninto the cellar again, took an enormous drink and ate up theone chicken in great glee.  When one of the chickens wasswallowed down, and still her master did not come, Gretellooked at the other and said, where one is, the other shouldbe likewise, the two go together.  What's right for the one isright for the other.  I think if I were to take anotherdraught it would do me no harm.  So she took another heartydrink, and let the second chicken follow the first.While she was making the most of it, her master came and cried,hurry up, Gretel, the guest is coming directly after me.  Yes,sir, I will soon serve up, answered Gretel.  Meantime the masterlooked to see that the table was properly laid, and took thegreat knife, wherewith he was going to carve the chickens, andsharpened it on the steps.  Presently the guest came, andknocked politely and courteously at the house-door.  Gretel ran,and looked to see who was there, and when she saw the guest,she put her finger to her lips and said, hush. Hush.  Go awayas quickly as you can, if my master catches you it will be theworse for you.  He certainly did ask you to supper, but hisintention is to cut off your two ears.  Just listen how heis sharpening the knife for it.  The guest heard the sharpening, andhurried down the steps again as fast as he could.  Gretel wasnot idle.  She ran screaming to her master, and cried, you haveinvited a fine guest.  Why, Gretel, what do you mean by that.Yes, said she, he has taken the chickens which I was justgoing to serveup, off the dish, and has run away with them.  That's a nicetrick, said her master, and lamented the fine chickens.  Ifhe had but left me one, so that something remained for me toeat.  He called to him to stop, but the guest pretended not tohear.  Then he ran after him with the knife still in his hand,crying, just one, just one, meaning that the guest should leavehim just one chicken, and not take both.  The guest, however,thought no otherwise than that he was to give up one of hisears, and ran as if fire were burning under him, in order totake them both home with him.Once upon a time the little hen went with the little cockto the nut-hill, and they agreed together that whichsoever ofthem found a kernel of a nut should share it with the other.Then the hen found a large, large nut, but said nothing aboutit, intending to eat the kernel herself.  The kernel, however,was so large that she could not swallow it, and it remainedsticking in her throat, so that she was alarmed lest she shouldbe choked.  Then she cried, cock, I entreat you to run as fastas you can and fetch me some water, or I shall choke.  The littlecock did run as fast as he could to the spring, and said, stream,you are to give me some water, the little hen is lying on thenut-hill, and she has swallowed a large nut, and is choking.  Thewell answered, first run to the bride, and get her to give yousome red silk.  The little cock ran to the bride and said, bride,you are to give me some red silk, I want to give red silk to thewell, the well is to give me some water, I am to take the waterto the little hen who is lying on the nut-hill and hasswallowed a great nut-kernel, and is choking with it.  The brideanswered, first run and bring me my little wreath which ishanging to a willow.  So the little cock ran to the willow, anddrew the wreath from the branch and took it to the bride, andthe bride gave him some red silk for it, which he took to thewell, who gave him some water for it.  Then the little cock tookthe water to the hen, but when he got there the hen had choked inthe meantime, and lay there dead and did not move.  Then thecock was so distressed that he cried aloud, and every animalcame to lament the little hen, and six mice built a littlecarriage to carry her to her grave, and when the carriage wasready they harnessed themselves to it, and the cock drove.  Onthe way, however, they met the fox, who said, where are yougoing, little cock.  I am going to bury my little hen.  MayI drive with you.  Yes, but seat yourself at the back of thecarriage, for in the front my little horses could not drag you.Then the procession went onwards, and they reached a stream.How are we to cross over, said the little cock.  A straw waslying by the stream and it said, I will lay myself straightacross, and then youcan drive over me.  But when the six mice came to the bridge,the straw slipped and fell into the water, and the six miceall fell in and were drowned.  Then they were again in difficulty,and a coal came and said, I am large enough, I will lay myselfacross, and you shall drive over me.  So the coal also laiditself across the water, but unhappily just touched it, at whichthe coal hissed, was extinguished and died.  When a stone sawthat, it took pity on the little cock, wished to help him, andlaid itself over the water.  Then the cock drew the carriagehimself, but when he got it over and reached the shore with thedead hen, and was about to draw over the others who were sittingbehind as well, there were too many of them, the carriage ranback, and they all fell into the water together, and were drowned.Then the little cock was left alone with the dead hen, and dug agrave for her and laid her in it, and made a mound above it, onwhich he sat down and fretted until he died too, and then everyonewas dead.Once upon a time there was a man who did nothing but gamble, andfor that reason people never called him anything but gamblingHansel, and as he never ceased to gamble, he played away his houseand all that he had.  Now the very day before his creditors wereto take his house from him, came the Lord and St. Peter, andasked him to give them shelter for the night.  Then gambling Hanselsaid, for my part, you may stay the night, but I cannot give youa bed or anything to eat.  So the Lord said he was just to takethem in, and they themselves would buy something to eat, to whichgambling Hansel made no objection.  Thereupon St. Peter gave himthree groschen, and said he was to go to the baker's and fetchsome bread.  So gambling Hansel went, but when he reached the housewhere the other gambling vagabonds were gathered together, they,although they had won all that he had, greeted him clamorously,and said, Hansel, do come in.  Oh, said he, do you want to winthree groschen too.  On this they would not let him go.  So hewent in, and played away the three groschen also.  MeanwhileSt. Peter and the Lord were waiting, and as he was so long incoming, they set out to meet him.  When gambling Hansel came,however, he pretended that the money had fallen into the gutter,and kept raking about in it all the while to find it, butour Lord alreadyknew that he had lost it in play.  St. Peter again gave himthree groschen, and now he did not allow himself to be led awayonce more, but fetched them the loaf.  Our Lord then inquired ifhe had no wine, and he said, alack, sir, the casks are all empty.But the Lord said he was to go down into the cellar, for the bestwine was still there.  For a long time he would not believethis, but at length he said, well, I will go down, but I knowthat there is none there.  When he turned the tap, however, loand behold, the best of wine ran out.  So he took it to them, andthe two passed the night there.  Early next day our Lord toldgambling Hansel that he might beg three favors.  The Lordexpected that he would ask to go to heaven, but gambling Hanselasked for a pack of cards with which he could win everything,for dice with which he would win everything, and for a treewhereon every kind of fruit would grow, and from which no one whohad climbed up, could descend until he bade him do so.  The Lordgave him all that he had asked, and departed with St. Peter.And now gambling Hansel at once set about gambling in realearnest, and before long he had gained half the world.  Upon thisSt. Peter said to the Lord, Lord, this thing must not go on, atlast he will win the whole world.  We must send death to him.And they sent death to him.  When death appeared, gambling Hanselhad just seated himself at the gaming-table, and death said,Hansel, come out a while.  But gambling Hansel said, just waita little until the game is done, and in the meantime get up intothat tree out there, and gather a little fruit that we may havesomething to munch on our way.  Thereupon death climbed up, butwhen he wanted to come down again, he could not, and gamblingHansel left him up there for seven years, during which time no onedied.So St. Peter said to the Lord, Lord, this thing must not go on.People no longer die, we must go ourselves.  And they wentthemselves, and the Lord commanded Hansel to let death come down.So Hansel went at once to death and said to him, come down, anddeath took him directly and put an end to him.  They went awaytogether and came to the next world, and then gamblingHansel made straight for the door of heaven, and knocked at it.Who is there.  Gambling Hansel.  Ah, we will have nothing to dowith him.  Begone.  So he went to the door of purgatory, andknocked once more.  Who is there.  Gambling Hansel.  Ah, there isquite enough weeping and wailing here without him.  We do notwant to gamble, just go away again.  Then he went to the door ofhell, and there they let him in.  There was, however, no one athome but old lucifer and the crooked devils - the straight oneswere just busy in the world.  And no sooner was Hansel there thanhe sat down to gamble again.  Lucifer, however, had nothing tolose, but his mis-shapen devils, and gambling Hansel won themfrom him, as with his cards he could not fail to do.  And now hewas off again with his crooked devils, and they went to hohenfurtand pulled up a hop-pole, and with it went to heaven and began tothrust the pole against it, and heaven began to crack.  So againSt. Peter said, Lord, this thing cannot go on, we must let himin, or he will overthrow the whole heaven.  And they let him in.But gambling Hansel instantly began to play again, and there wassuch a noise and confusion that there was no hearing what theythemselves were saying.  Therefore St. Peter once more said,Lord, this cannot go on, we must throw him down, or he will makeall heaven rebellious.  So they went to him at once, and threwhim down, and his soul broke into fragments, and went into thegambling vagabonds who are living this very day.The fox once came to a meadow in which sat a flock of fine fatgeese, on which he smiled and said, I come in the nick of time,you are sitting together quite beautifully, so that I can eat youup one after the other.  The geese cackled with terror, sprangup, and began to wail and beg piteously for their lives.  Butthe fox would listen to nothing, and said, there is no mercyto be had.  You must die.  At length one of them took heart andsaid,  if we poor geese are to yield up our lives, show us theonly possible favor and allow us one more prayer, that we maynot die in our sins, and then we will place ourselves in a row,so that you can always pick yourself out the fattest.  Yes,said the fox, that is reasonable, and a pious request.  Prayaway, I will wait till you are done.  Then the first began agood long prayer, for ever saying, ga, ga, and as she wouldmake no end, the second did not wait until her turn came, butbegan also, ga, ga.  The thirdand fourth followed her, and soon they were all cacklingtogether.When they have done praying, the story shall be continued further,but at present they are still praying unceasingly.In olden times, when the Lord himself still used to walk about onthis earth amongst men, it once happened that he was tired andovertaken by the darkness before he could reach an inn.  Nowthere stood on the road before him two houses facing each other,the one large and beautiful, the other small and poor.  Thelarge one belonged to a rich man, and the small one to a poorman.Then the Lord thought, I shall be no burden to the rich man.I will stay the night with him.  Then the rich man heard someoneknocking at his door, he opened the window and asked the strangerwhat he wanted.  The Lord answered, I only ask for a night'slodging.Then the rich man looked at the traveler from head to foot, andas the Lord was wearing common clothes, and did not look likeone who had much money in his pocket, he shook his head, andsaid, no, I cannot take you in, my rooms are full of herbs andseeds.  And if I were to lodge everyone who knocked at my door,I might very soon go begging myself.  Go somewhere else fora lodging, and with this he shut down the window and left theLord standing there.So the Lord turned his back on the rich man, and went acrossto the small house and knocked.  He had hardly done so whenthe poor man opened the little door and bade the travelercome in.  Pass the night with me, it is already dark, said he.You cannot go any further to-night.  This pleased the Lord,and he went in.  The poor man's wife shook hands with him,and welcomed him, and said hewas to make himself at home and put up with what they had got.They had not much to offer him, but what they had they wouldgive him with all their hearts.  Then she put the potatoes onthe fire, and while they were boiling, she milked the goat,that they might have a little milk with them.  When thecloth was laid, the Lord sat down with the man and his wife,and he enjoyed their coarse food, for there were happy facesat the table.  When they had had supper and it was bed-time,the woman called her husband apart and said, listen, dearhusband, let us make up a bed of straw for ourselves to-night,and then the poor traveler can sleep in our bed and have agood rest, for he has been walking the whole day through,and that makes one weary.  With all my heart, he answered,I will go and offer it to him.  And he went to the strangerand invited him, if he had no objection, to sleep in theirbed and rest his limbs properly.  But the Lord was unwillingto take their bed from the two old folks.  However, theywould not be satisfied, until at length he did it and laydown in their bed, while they themselves lay on some strawon the ground.Next morning they got up before daybreak, and made as good abreakfast as they could for the guest.  When the sun shone inthrough the little window, and the Lord had got up, he againate with them, and then prepared to set out on his journey.But as he was standing at the door he turned round and said,as you are so kind and good, you may wish three things foryourselves and I will grant them.  Then the man said, whatelse should I wish for but eternal happiness, and that wetwo, as long as we live, may be healthy and have every dayour daily bread.  For the third wish, I do not know what tohave.  And the Lord said to him, will you wish for a newhouse instead of this old one.  Oh, yes, said the man.If I can have that, too, I should like it very much.  Andthe Lord fulfilled his wish, and changed their old houseinto a new one, again gave them his blessing, and went on.The sun was high when the rich man got up and leaned outof his window and saw, on the opposite side of the way, anew clean-lookinghouse with red tiles and bright windows where the old hutused to be.  He was very much astonished, and called hiswife and said to her, tell me, what can have happened.Last night there was a miserable little hut standing there,and to-day there is a beautiful new house.  Run over and seehow that has come to pass.So his wife went and asked the poor man, and he said to her,yesterday evening a traveler came here and asked for anight's lodging, and this morning when he took leave ofus he granted us three wishes - eternal happiness, healthduring this life and our daily bread as well, andbesides this, a beautiful new house instead of our oldhut.When the rich man's wife heard this, she ran back in hasteand told her husband how it had happened.  The man said,I could tear myself to pieces.  If I had but known that.That traveler came to our house too, and wanted to sleephere, and I sent him away.  Quick, said his wife, get onyour horse.  You can still catch the man up, and then you mustask to have three wishes granted to you also.The rich man followed the good counsel and galloped away onhis horse, and soon came up with the Lord.  He spoke to himsoftly and pleasantly, and begged him not to take itamiss that he had not let him in directly.  He was lookingfor the front-door key, and in the meantime the stranger hadgone away.  If he returned the same way he must come andstay with him.  Yes, said the Lord.  If I ever come backagain, I will do so.  Then the rich man asked if might notwish for three things too, as his neighbor had done.Yes, said the Lord, he might, but it would not be to hisadvantage, and he had better not wish for anything.  Butthe rich man thought that he could easily ask for somethingwhich would add to his happiness, if he only knew that it wouldbe granted.  So the Lord said to him, ride home, then, andthree wishes which you shall make, shall be fulfilled.The rich man had now gained what he wanted, so he rode home,and began to consider what he should wish for.  As hewas thusthinking he let the bridle fall, and the horse began to caperabout, so that he was continually disturbed in his meditations,and could not collect his thoughts at all.  He patted its neck,and said, gently, lisa, but the horse only began new tricks.Then at last he was angry, and cried quite impatiently, I wishyour neck was broken.  Directly he had said the words, down thehorse fell on the ground, and there it lay dead and nevermoved again.  And thus was his first wish fulfilled.  As hewas miserly by nature, he did not like to leave the harnesslying there.  So he cut it off, and put it on his back.  Andnow he had to go on foot.  I have still two wishes left, saidhe, and comforted himself with that thought.And now as he was walking slowly through the sand, and thesun was burning hot at noon-day, he grew quite bad-temperedand angry.  The saddle hurt his back, and he had not yet anyidea what to wish for.  If I were to wish for all the richesand treasures in the world, said he to himself, I should stillto think of all kinds of other things later on.  I know that,beforehand.  But I will manage so that there is nothing at allleft me to wish for afterwards.  Then he sighed and said, ah,if I were but that bavarian peasant, who likewise had threewishes granted to him, and knew quite well what to do, andin the first place wished for a great deal of beer, and inthe second for as much beer as he was able to drink, and inthe third for a barrel of beer into the bargain.Many a time he thought he had found it, but then it seemed tohim to be, after all, too little.  Then it came into hismind, what an easy life his wife had, for she stayed athome in a cool room and enjoyed herself.  This really did vexhim, and before he was aware, he said, I just wish she wassitting there on this saddle, and could not get off it,instead of my having to drag it along on my back.  And as thelast word was spoken, the saddle disappeared from his back,and he saw that his second wish had been fulfilled.  Thenhe really did feel hot.  He began to run and wanted to be quitealone in his own room at home, to think of something reallybig for his last wish.  But when he arrived there and openedthe parlor-door, hesaw his wife sitting in the middle of the room on the saddle,crying and complaining, and quite unable to get off it.  Sohe said, do bear it, and I will wish for all the riches onearth for you, only stay where you are.  She, however, calledhim a fool, and said, what good will all the riches on earthdo me, if I am to sit on this saddle.  You have wished meon it, so you must help me off.  So whether he would or not,he was forced to let his third wish be that she should bequit of the saddle, and able to get off it, and immediatelythe wish was fulfilled.  So he got nothing by it but vexation,trouble, abuse, and the loss of his horse.  But the poorpeople lived contentedly, quietly, and piously until theirhappy death.Once upon a time lived a peasant and his wife, and the parsonof the village had a fancy for the wife, and had wished fora long while to spend a whole day happily with her.  Thepeasant woman, too, was quite willing.  One day, therefore, hesaid to the woman, listen, my dear friend, I have now thought ofa way by which we can for once spend a whole day happily together.I'll tell you what.  On wednesday, you must take to your bed, andtell your husband you are ill, and as long as you complain andact being ill properly, and go on doing so until sunday when Ihave to preach, I will then say in my sermon that whosoever hasat home a sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father,a sick mother, a sick brother or whosoever else it may be,and makes a pilgrimage to the gockerli hill in italy, whereyou can get a peck of laurel-leaves for a kreuzer, the sick child,the sick husband, the sick wife, the sick father, or sick mother,the sick sister, or whosoever else it may be, will be restoredto health immediately.I will manage it, said the woman promptly.  On the wednesday,therefore, the peasant woman took to her bed, and complained andlamented as agreed on, and her husband did everything forher that he could think of, but nothing did her any good, and whensunday came the woman said, I feel as ill as if I were going todie at once, but there is one thing I should like to do beforemy end - I should like to hear the parson's sermon that he isgoing to preach to-day.  On that the peasant said, ah, my child,do not do it - you might make yourself worse if you were to getup.  Look, I will hear the sermon, and will attend to it verycarefully, and will tell you everything the parson says.Well, said the woman, go, then, and pay great attention, andrepeat to me all that you hear.  So the peasant heard the sermon,and the parson said, if any one had at home a sick child, a sickhusband, a sick wife, a sick father a sick mother, a sick sister,brother or any one else, and would make a pilgimage to thegockerli hill in italy, where a peck of laurel-leaves costs akreuzer, the sick child, sick husband, sick wife, sick father,sick mother, sick sister, brother, or whosoever else it mightbe, would be restored to health instantly, and whosoever wishedto undertake the journey was to go to him after the service wasover, and he would give him the sack for the laurel-leaves andthe kreuzer.  Then no one was more rejoiced than the peasant,and after the service was over, he went at once to the parson,who gave him the bag for the laurel-leaves and the kreuzer.After that he went home, and even at the house door he cried,hurrah.  Dear wife, it is now almost the same thing as if you werewell.  The parson has preached to-day that whosoever had at homea sick child, a sick husband, a sick wife, a sick father, a sickmother, a sick sister, brother or whoever it might be, and wouldmake a pilgrimage to the gockerli hill in italy, where a peckof laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer, the sick child, sick husband,sick wife, sick father, sick mother, sick sister, brother, orwhosoever else it was, would be cured immediately, and now Ihave already got the bag and the kreuzer from the parson, andwill at once begin my journey so that you may get well the faster,and thereupon he went away.  He was hardly gone however beforethe woman got up, and the parson was there immediately.But now we will leave these two for a while, and follow thepeasant, who walked on quickly without stopping, in order toget the sooner to the gockerli hill, and on his way he met hisgossip.  His gossip was an egg-merchant, and was just comingfrom the market, where he had sold his eggs.  May you be blessed,said the gossip, where are you off to so fast.To all eternity, my friend, said the peasant, my wife is ill,and I have been to-day to hear the parson's sermon, and hepreached that if any one had in his house a sick child, a sickhusband, a sickwife, a sick father, a sick mother, a sick sister, brother or anyone else, and made a pilgrimage to the gockerli hill in italy,where a peck of laurel-leaves costs a kreuzer, the sick child, thesick husband, the sick wife, the sick father, the sick mother,the sick sister, brother or whosoever else it was, would becured immediately, and so I have got the bag for the laurel-leavesand the kreuzer from the parson, and now I am beginning mypilgrimage.  But listen, gossip, said the egg-merchant to thepeasant, are you, then, stupid enough to believe such a thingas that.  Don't you know what it means.  The parson wants tospend a whole day alone with your wife in peace, so he has givenyou this job to do to get you out of the way.My word, said the peasant.  How I'd like to know if that's true.Come, then, said the gossip, I'll tell you what to do.  Getinto my egg-basket and I will carry you home, and then you willsee for yourself.  So that was settled, and the gossip put thepeasant into his egg-basket and carried him home.When they got to the house, hurrah.  Everything was alreadyvery merry there.  The woman had already had nearly everythingkilled that was in the farmyard, and had made pancakes, and theparson was there, and had brought his fiddle with him.  Thegossip knocked at the door, and woman asked who was there.  Itis I, gossip, said the egg-merchant, give me shelter this night.I have not sold my eggs at the market, so now I have to carrythem home again, and they are so heavy that I shall never be ableto do it, for it is dark already.Indeed, my friend, said the woman, you come at a very inconvenienttime for me, but as you are here it can't be helped.  Come in,and take a seat there on the bench by the stove.  Then sheplaced the gossip and the basket which he carried on his back onthe bench by the stove.  The parson and the woman, however, wereas merry as could be.  At length the parson said, listen, mydear friend, you can sing beautifully.  Sing something to me.Oh, said the woman,I cannot sing now.  In my young days indeed I could sing wellenough, but that's all over now.Come, said the parson once more, do sing some little song.On that the woman began and sang,          I've sent my husband away from me          to the gockerli hill in italy.Thereupon the parson sang,          I wish 'twas a year before he came back,          I'd never ask him for the laurel-leaf sack.          Hallelujah.Then the gossip who was in the background began to sing -but I ought to tell you the peasant was called hildebrand -so the gossip sang,          what are you doing, my hildebrand dear,          there on the bench by the stove so near.          Hallelujah.And then the peasant sang from his basket,          all singing I ever shall hate from this day,          and here in this basket no longer I'll stay.          Hallelujah.And he climbed out of the basket, and flogged the parsonout of the house.There was once upon a time a poor peasant called crabb, who drovewith two oxen a load of wood to the town, and sold it to a doctorfor two talers.  When the money was being counted out to him, itso happened that the doctor was sitting at table, and when thepeasant saw how well he ate and drank, his heart desired what hesaw, and he would willingly have been a doctor too.  So heremained standing a while, and at length inquired if he too couldnot be a doctor.  Oh, yes, said the doctor, that is soon managed.What must I do, asked the peasant.  In the first place buyyourself an abc book of the kind which has a cock on thefrontispiece.  In the second, turn your cart and your two oxeninto money, and get yourself some clothes, and whatsoever elsepertains to medicine.  Thirdly, have a sign painted for yourselfwith the words, I am doctor knowall, and have that nailed up aboveyour house-door.  The peasant did everything that he had beentold to do.  When he had doctored people awhile, but not long, arich and great lord had some money stolen.  Then he was told aboutdoctor knowall who lived in such and such a village, and must knowwhat had become of the money.  So the lord had the horsesharnessed to his carriage, drove out to the village, and askedcrabb if he were doctor knowall.  Yes, hewas, he said.  Then he was to go with him and bring back the stolenmoney.  Oh, yes, but grete, my wife, must go too.  The lord waswilling and let both of them have a seat in the carriage, andthey all drove away together.  When they came to the nobleman'scastle, the table was spread, and crabb was told to sit down andeat.  Yes, but my wife, grete, too, said he, and he seated himselfwith her at the table.  And when the first servant came with adish of delicate fare, the peasant nudged his wife, and said,grete, that was the first.  Meaning that was the servant whobrought the first dish.  The servant, however, thought heintended by that to say, that is the first thief, and as heactually was so, he was terrified, and said to his comradeoutside, the doctor knows all, we shall fare ill, he said I wasthe first.  The second did not want to go in at all, but wasforced.  So when he went in with his dish, the peasant nudged hiswife, and said, grete, that is the second.  This servant wasequally alarmed, and he got out as fast as he could.  The thirdfared no better, for the peasant again said, grete, that is thethird.  The fourth had to carry in a dish that was covered, and thelord told the doctor that he was to show his skill, and guesswhat was beneath the cover.  Actually, there were crabs.  Thedoctor looked at the dish, had no idea what to say, and cried,ah, poor crabb.  When the lord heard that, he cried, there.  Heknows it, he must also know who had the money.On this the servants looked terribly uneasy, and made a signto the doctor that they wished him to step outside for a moment.When therefore he went out, all four of them confessed to himthat they had stolen the money, and said that they wouldwillingly restore it and give him a heavy sum into the bargain,if he would not denounce them, for if he did they would be hanged.They led him to the spot where the money was concealed.  Withthis the doctor was satisfied, and returned to the hall, satdown to the table, and said, my lord, now will I search in my bookwhere the gold is hidden.  The fifth servant, however, creptinto the stove to hear if the doctor knew still more.  But thedoctor sat still and opened his abc book, turned the pagesbackwards and forwards, and looked for the cock.  As he could notfind it immediately he said, I know you are there, so you hadbetter come out.  Then the fellow in the stove thought that thedoctor meant him, and full of terror, sprang out, crying, thatman knows everything.  Then Dr. Knowall showed the lord where themoney was, but did not say who had stolen it, and received fromboth sides much money in reward, and became a renowned man.There was once a rich man, who had a servant who served himdiligently and honestly.  He was every morning the first out ofbed, and the last to go to rest at night, and whenever there wasa difficult job to be done, which nobody cared to undertake, hewas always the first to set himself to it.  Moreover, he nevercomplained, but was contented with everything and always merry.When a year was ended, his master gave him no wages, for he saidto himself, that is the cleverest way, for I shall save somethingand he will not go away, but stay quietly in my service.  Theservant said nothing, but did his work the second year as he haddone it the first, and when at the end of this, likewise, hereceived no wages, he submitted and still stayed on.When the third year also was past, the master considered, put hishand in his pocket, but pulled nothing out.  Then at last theservant said, master, for three years I have served you honestly,be so good as to give me what I ought to have, for I wish toleave, and look about me a little more in the world.Yes, my good fellow, answered the old miser, you have served meindustriously, and therefore you shall be graciously rewarded.And he put his hand into his pocket, but counted out only threefarthings, saying, there, you have a farthing for each year, thatis large and liberal pay, such as you would have received fromfew masters.The honest servant, who understood little about money, put hisfortune into his pocket, and thought, ah, now that I have mypurse full, why need I trouble and plague myself any longer withhard work.  So on he went, up hill and down dale, and sang andjumped to his heart's content.  Now it came to pass that as hewas going by a thicket a little man stepped out, and called tohim, whither away, merry brother.  I see you do not carry manycares.  Why should I be sad, answered the servant, I have enough.Three years, wages are jingling in my pocket.How much is your treasure, the dwarf asked him.  How much.  Threefarthings sterling, all told.  Look here, said the dwarf, I am apoor needy man, give me your three farthings, I can work no longerbut you are young, and can easily earn your bread.And as the servant had a good heart, and felt pity for the littleman, he gave him the three farthings, saying, take them in thename of heaven, I shall not be any the worse for it.Then the little man said, as I see you have a good heart I grantyou three wishes, one for each farthing, they shall all befulfilled.  Aha, said the servant, you are one of those who canwork wonders.  Well, then, if it is to be so, I wish, first, fora gun, which shall hit everything that I aim at, secondly, for afiddle, which whenI play on it, shall compel all who hear it to dance, thirdly, thatif I ask a favor of any one he shall not be able to refuse it.All that shall you have, said the dwarf, and put his hand into thebush, and just imagine, there lay a fiddle and gun, all ready,just as if they had been ordered.  These he gave to the servant,and then said to him, whatever you may ask at any time, no man inthe world shall be able to deny you.Heart alive.  What more can one desire, said the servant, tohimself, and went merrily onwards.  Soon afterwards he met a Jewwith a long goat's beard, who was standing listening to the songof a bird which was sitting up at the top of a tree.  Goodheavens, he was exclaiming, that such a small creature should havesuch a fearfully loud voice.  If it were but mine.  If onlysomeone would sprinkle some salt upon its tail.  If that is all,said the servant, the bird shall soon be down here.  And takingaim he blew, and down fell the bird into the thorn-bushes.  Go,you rogue, he said to the Jew, and fetch the bird out foryourself.Oh, said the Jew, leave out the rogue, my master, and I will do itat once.  I will get the bird out for myself, now that you havehit it.  Then he lay down on the ground, and began to crawlinto the thicket.When he was fast among the thorns, the good servant's humorso tempted him that he took up his fiddle and began to play.  In amoment the Jew's legs began to move, and to jump into the air, andthe more the servant fiddled the better went the dance.  But thethorns tore his shabby coat from him, combed his beard, andpricked and plucked him all over the body.  Oh, dear, cried theJew, what do I want with your fiddling.  Leave the fiddle alonemaster, I do not want to dance.But the servant did not listen to him, and thought, you havefleeced people often enough, now the thorn-bushes shall do thesame to you.  And he began to play over again, so that the Jewhad to jump higher than ever, and scraps of his coat were lefthanging on the thorns.  Oh, woe's me, cried the Jew, I will givethe gentleman whatsoever he asks if only he leaves off fiddling,a whole purseful of gold.  If you are so liberal, said the servant,I will stop my music, but this I must say to your credit, thatyou dance to it so well that one must really admire it.  Andhaving taken the purse he went his way.The Jew stood still and watched the servant quietly until he wasfar off and out of sight, and then he screamed out with all hismight, you miserable musician, you beer-house fiddler.  Wait tillI catch you alone, I will hunt you till the soles of your shoesfall off.  You ragamuffin, just put six farthings in your mouth,that you may be worth three halfpence.  And went on abusing him asfast as he could speak.  As soon as he had refreshed himself alittle in this way, and got his breath again, he ran into the townto the justice.My lord judge, he said, I have come to make a complaint, see howa rascal has robbed and ill-treated me on the public highway.  Astone on the ground might pity me, my clothes all torn, my bodypricked and scratched, my little all gone with my purse - goodducats, each piece better than the last, for God's sake let theman be thrown into prison.Was it a soldier, said the judge, who cut you thus with hissabre.  Nothing of the sort, said the Jew, it was no sword that hehad, but a gun hanging at his back, and a fiddle at his neck, thewretch may easily be recognized.So the judge sent his people out after the man, and they found thegood servant, who had been going quite slowly along, and theyfound, too, the purse with the money upon him.  As soon as hewas taken before the judge he said, I did not touch the Jew, nortake his money, he gave it to me of his own free will, that Imight leave off fiddling because he could not bear my music.Heaven defend us, cried the Jew, his lies are as thick as fliesupon the wall.But the judge also did not believe his tale, and said, this isa bad defence, no Jew would do that.  And because he had committedrobbery on the public highway, he sentenced the good servant to behanged.  As he was being led away the Jew again screamed afterhim, you vagabond.  You dog of a fiddler.  Now you are going toreceive your well-earned reward.  The servant walked quietly withthe hangman up the ladder, but upon the last step he turned roundand said to the judge, grant me just one request before I die.Yes, if you do not ask your life, said the judge.I do not ask for life, answered the servant, but as a last favorlet me play once more upon my fiddle.The Jew raised a great cry of, murder.  Murder.  For goodness,sake do not allow it.  Do not allow it.  But the judge said, whyshould I not let him have this short pleasure.  It has beengranted to him, and he shall have it.  However, he could not haverefused on account of the gift which had been bestowed on theservant.Then the Jew cried, oh.  Woe's me.  Tie me, tie me fast.  Whilethe good servant took his fiddle from his neck, and made ready.As he gave the first scrape, they all began to quiver and shake,the judge, his clerk, and the hangman and his men, and the cordfell out of the hand of the one who was going to tie the Jewfast.  At the second scrape they all leaped up and began todance, the judge and the Jew being the best at jumping.  Soon allwho had gathered in the market-place out of curiosity were dancingwith them, old and young, fat and lean, one with another.  Thedogs, likewise, which had run there, got up on their hind legsand capered about, and the longer he played, the higher sprangthe dancers, so that they knocked against each other's headsand began to shriek terribly.At length the judge cried, quite of breath, I will give you yourlife if you will only stop fiddling.  The good servant thereuponhad compassion, took his fiddle and hung it round his neck again,and stepped down the ladder.  Then he went up to the Jew, who waslying upon the ground panting for breath, and said, you rascal,now confess, whence you got the money, or I will take my fiddleand begin to play again.  I stole it, I stole it, cried he, butyou have honestly earned it.  So the judge had the Jew takento the gallows and hanged as a thief.A countryman was once going out to plough with a pair of oxen.When he got to the field, both the animals, horns began to grow,and went on growing, and when he wanted to go home they were sobig that the oxen could not get through the gateway.  By goodluck a butcher came by just then, and he delivered them over tohim, and made the bargain in this way, that he should bring thebutcher a peck of rape-seed, and then the butcher was to count himout a brabant taler for every seed.  I call that well sold.  Thepeasant now went home, and carried the peck of rape-seed to him onhis back.  On the way, however, he lost one seed out of the bag.The butcher paid him justly as agreed on, and if the peasant hadnot lost the seed, he would have had one taler more.  By the timehe returned, the seed had grown into a tree which reached up tothe sky.  Then thought the peasant, as you have the chance,you must just see what the angels are doing up there above.  Sohe climbed up, and saw that the angels above were threshing oats,and he looked on.  While he was thus watching them, he observedthat the tree on which he was standing, was beginning to totter.He peeped down, and saw that someone was just going to cut itdown.  If I were to fall down from henceit would be a bad thing, thought he, and in his extremity he didnot know how to save himself better than by taking the chaff of theoats which lay there in heaps, and twisting a rope of it.  Helikewise snatched a hoe and a flail which were lying about inheaven, and let himself down by the rope.  But he came down onthe earth exactly in the middle of a deep, deep hole.  So it wasa real stroke of luck that he had brought the hoe, for he hoedhimself a flight of steps with it, and mounted up, and took theflail with him as a token of his truth, so that no one could haveany doubt of his story.Three army surgeons who thought they knew their art perfectlywere traveling about the world, and they came to an inn wherethey wanted to pass the night.  The host asked whence they came,and whither they were going.  We are roaming about the world andpractising our art.  Show me just once what you can do, saidthe host.  Then the first said he would cut off his hand, and putit on again early next morning.  The second said he would tearout his heart, and replace it next morning.  The third said he wouldgouge out his eyes and heal them again next morning.  If you cando that, said the innkeeper, you have learnt everything.  They,however, had a salve, with which they rubbed themselves, whichjoined parts together, and they constantly carried with them thelittle bottle in which it was.  Then they cut the hand, heartand eyes from their bodies as they had said they would, and laidthem all together on a plate, and gave it to the innkeeper.The innkeeper gave it to a servant-girl who was to set it in thecupboard, and take good care of it.  Secretly, however, the girlhad a lover, who was a soldier.  When therefore the innkeeper,the three army surgeons, and everyone else in the house were asleep,the soldier came and wanted something to eat.  The girl openedthe cupboard and brought him some food, and in her love forgotto shut the cupboard-door again.  She seated herself at the tableby her lover, and they chatted away together.  While she sat socontentedly there, thinking of no ill luck, the cat came creepingin, found the cupboard open, took the hand and heart and eyes ofthe three army surgeons, and ran off with them.  When the soldierhad done eating, and the girl was taking away the things andgoing to shut the cupboard, she saw that the plate which theinnkeeper had given her to take care of, was empty.  Then shesaid in a fright to her lover, ah, miserable girl, what shall Ido.  The hand is gone, the heart and the eyes are gone too, whatwill become of me in the morning.  Be easy, said he, I willhelp you out of your trouble.  There is a thief hanging outsideon the gallows, I will cut off his hand.  Which hand was it.The right one.  Then the girl gave him a sharp knife, and he wentand cut the poor sinner's right hand off, and brought it to her.After this he caught the cat and gouged its eyes out, and nownothing but the heart was missing.  Have you not been slaughtering,and are not the dead pigs in the cellar, said he.  Yes, said thegirl.  That's fine, said the soldier, and he went down and fetcheda pig's heart.  The girl placed all together on the plate, andput it in the cupboard, and when after this her lover took leaveof her, she went quietly to bed.In the morning when the three army surgeons got up, they toldthe girl she was to bring them the plate on which thehand, heart, and eyes were lying.  Then she brought it out ofthe cupboard, and the first fixed the thief's hand on and smearedit with his salve, and it promptly grew to his arm.  The secondtook the cat's eyes and put them in his own head.  The thirdfixed the pig's heart firm in the place where his own had been,and the innkeeper stood by, admired their skill, and said hehad never yet seen such a thing asthat done, and would sing their praises and recommend them toeveryone.  Then they paid their bill, and traveled further.As they were on their way, the one with the pig's heart did notstay with them at all, but wherever there was a corner he ranto it, and rooted about in it with his nose as pigs do.  Theothers wanted to hold him back by the tail of his coat, but thatdid no good.  He tore himself loose, and ran wherever the dirt wasdeepest.  The second also behaved very strangely.  He rubbedhis eyes, and said to the others, comrades, what has happened.These are not my eyes.  I don't see at all.  Will one of you leadme, so that I do not fall.  Then with difficulty they traveled ontill evening, when they reached another inn.  They went into thebar together, and there at a table in the corner sat a rich mancounting money.  The one with the thief's hand walked roundabout him, made a few jerky movements with his arm, and atlast when the stranger turned away, snatched at the pile of money,and took a handful from it.  One of them saw this, andsaid, comrade, what are you about.  You must not steal, shameon you.  Eh, said he, but what can I do.  My hand twitches, andI am forced to snatch things whether I will or not.After this, they lay down to sleep, and while they were lyingthere it was so dark that no one could see his own hand.  Allat once the one with the cat's eyes awoke, aroused the others,and said, brothers, just look up, do you see the white micerunning about there.  The two sat up, but could see nothing.  Thensaid he, things are not right with us, we have not got backagain what is ours.  We must return to the innkeeper, he hasdeceived us.  So they went back the next morning, and told thehost they had not received what was their own, that the firsthad a thief's hand, the second cat's eyes, and the third apig's heart.  The innkeeper said that the girl must be to blamefor that, and was going to call her, but when she had seen thethree coming, she had run out by the backdoor, and not come back.Then the three said he must give them a great deal of money, orthey would set the red cock on his roof. - The symbol of a redcock for fire is of remote antiquity. - He gave them what hehad, and whatever he could raise, and the three went awaywith it.  It was enough for the rest of their lives, but theywould rather have had their own rightful organs.Seven swabians were once together.  The first was masterschulz, the second, jackli, the third, marli, the fourth,jergli, the fifth, michal, the sixth, Hans, the seventh,veitli.  All seven had made up their minds to travelabout the world to seek adventures and perform greatdeeds.  But in order that they might go in safety and witharms in their hands, they thought it would be advisablethat they should have one solitary, but very strong,and very long spear made for them.  This spear all seven ofthem took in their hands at once.  In front walked theboldest and bravest,and that was master schulz.  All the others followed in arow, and veitli was the last.  Then it came to pass oneday in the hay month, when they had walked a long distance,and still had a long way to go before they reached thevillage where they were to pass the night, that as theywere in a meadow in the twilight a great beetle or hornetflew by them from behind a bush, and hummed in a menacingmanner.  Master schulz was so terrified that he all but droppedthe spear, and a cold sweat broke out over his whole body.Hark, hark, cried he to his comrades, good heavens.  I hear adrum.  Jackli, who was behind him holding the spear, and intowhose nose some smell had risen, said, something is mostcertainly going on, for I smell the powder and the match.  Atthese words master schulz began to take to flight, and in atrice jumpedover a hedge, but as he just happened to jump on to the teeth ofa rake which had been left lying there after the hay-making, thehandle of it struck against his face and gave him a tremendousblow.  O dear.  O dear, screamed master schulz.  Take meprisoner, I surrender, I surrender.  The other six all leaptover, one on the top of the other, crying, if you surrender, Isurrender too.  If you surrender, I surrender too.  At length,as no enemy was there to bind and take them away, they saw thatthey had been mistaken, and in order that the story might notbe known, and they be treated as fools and ridiculed, theyall swore to each other to hold their peace about it until oneof them should speak of it by mistake.Then they journeyed onwards.  The second danger which theysurvived cannot be compared with the first.  Some days afterwards,their path led them through a fallow-field where a hare was sittingsleeping in the sun.  Her ears were standing straight up, and hergreat glassy eyes were wide open.  All of them were alarmed atthe sight of the horrible wild beast, and they consulted togetheras to what it would be the least dangerous to do.  For if theywere to run away, they knew that the monster would pursue andswallow them whole.  So they said, we must go through a greatand dangerous struggle.  Boldly ventured, is half won, and allseven grasped the spear, master schulz in front, and veitlibehind.  Master schulz was always trying to keep the spearback, but veitli had become quite brave while behind, and wantedto dash forward and cried,          strike home, in every swabian's name,          or else I wish you may be lame.But Hans knew how to meet this, and said,          thunder and lightning, it's fine to prate,          but for dragon-hunting you are always late.Michal cried,          nothing is missing, not even a hair,          be sure the devil himself is there.Then it was jergli's turn, and he said,          if it be not he, it's at least his mother,          or else the devil's own step-brother.And now marli had a bright thought, and said to veitli,          advance, veitli, advance, advance,          and I behind will hold the lance.Veitli, however, did not obey, and jackli said,          tis schulz's place the first to be,          no one deserves that honor but he.Then master schulz plucked up his courage, and said, gravely,          then let us boldly advance to the fight,          thus we shall show our valor and might.Hereupon they all together set on the dragon.  Masterschulz crossed himself and prayed for God's assistance, butas all this was of no avail, and he was getting nearer and nearerto the enemy, he screamed, oho, oho, ho, ho, ho, in the greatestanguish.  This awakened the hare, which in great alarm dartedswiftly away.  When master schulz saw her thus flying from thefield of battle, he cried in his joy,          quick, veitli, quick, look there, look there,          the monster's nothing but a hare.But the swabian allies went in search of further adventures, andcame to the moselle, a mossy, quiet, deep river, over which there arefew bridges, and which in many places people have to cross inboats.  As the seven swabians did not know this, they calledto a man who was working on the opposite side of the river, toknow how people contrived to get across.  The distance and theirway of speaking made the man unable to understand what theywanted, and he said, what, what, in the way people speak inthe neighborhood of treves.  Master schulz thought he was saying,wade, wade through the water, and as he was the first, beganto set out andwent into the moselle.  It was not long before he sank in themud and the deep waves which drove against him, but his hat wasblown on the opposite shore by the wind, and a frog sat downbeside it, and croaked, wat, wat, wat.  The other six on theopposite side heard that, and said, oho, comrades, masterschulz is calling us.  If he can wade across, why cannot we.So they all jumped into the water together in a great hurry, andwere drowned, and thus one frog took the lives of all six ofthem, and not one of the swabian allies ever reached home again.There were once three apprentices, who had agreed to keep alwaystogether while traveling, and always to work in the sametown.  At one time, however, their masters had no more workto give them, so that at last they were in rags, and had nothingto live on.  Then one of them said, what shall we do.  We cannotstay here any longer, we will travel once more, and if we donot find any work in the town we go to, we will arrange withthe innkeeper there, that we are to write and tell him where weare staying, so that we can always have news of each other, andthen we will separate.  And that seemed best to the others also.They went forth, and met on the way a richly-dressed man whoasked who they were.  We are apprentices looking for work.  Up tothis time we have kept together, but if we cannot find anythingto do we are going to separate.  There is no need for that, saidthe man, if you will do what I tell you, you shall not want forgold or for work.  Nay, you shall become great lords, and drivein your carriages.  One of them said, if our souls and salvationbe not endangered, we will certainly do it.  They will not,replied the man,I have no claim on you.  One of the others, however, had lookedat his feet, and when he saw a horse's foot and a man's foot,he did not want to have anything to do with him.  Then thedevil said, be easy, I have no designs on you, but on anothersoul, which is half my own already, and whose measure shallbut run full.  As they were now secure, they consented, and thedevil told them what he wanted.  The first was to answer,all three of us, to every question.  The second was to say,for money, and the third, and quite right too.  They were alwaysto say this, one after the other, but they were not to say oneword more, and if they disobeyed this order, all their money woulddisappear at once, but so long as they observed it, their pocketswould always be full.  As a beginning, he at once gave them asmuch as they could carry, and told them to go to such and suchan inn when they got to the town.  They went to it, and theinnkeeper came to meet them, and asked if they wished foranything to eat.  The first replied, all three of us.  Yes,said the host, that is what I mean.  The second said, for money.Of course, said the host.  The third said, and quite right too.Certainly it is right, said the host.Good meat and drink were now brought to them, and they were wellwaited on.  After the dinner came the payment, and the innkeepergave the bill to the one who said, all three of us, the secondsaid, for money, and the third, and quite right too.  Indeedit is right, said the host, all three pay, and without money Ican give nothing.  They, however, paid even more than he hadasked.  The lodgers, who were looking on, said, these people mustbe mad.  Yes, indeed they are, said the host, they are not verywise.  So they stayed some time in the inn, and said nothing elsebut, all three of us, for money, and and quite right too.  Butthey saw and knew all that was going on.  It so happened that agreat merchant came with a large sum of money, and said, sirhost, take care of my money for me, here are three crazy apprenticeswho might steal it from me.  The host did as he was asked.  Ashe was carrying the trunk into his room, he felt that it washeavy with gold.  Thereupon he gave the three apprentices alodging below, but the merchant received a separate apartmentupstairs.  When it was midnight, and the host thought that allwere asleep, he came with his wife, and they had an axe andstruck the rich merchant dead.   And after they had murderedhim they went to bed again.  When it was day there was a greatoutcry.  The merchant lay dead in bed bathed in blood.  Allthe guests came running out, but the host said, the threecrazy apprentices have done this.  The lodgers confirmed it,and said, it can have been no one else.  The innkeeper, however,had them called, and said to them, have you killed the merchant.All three of us, said the first.  For money, said the second.And the third added, and quite right too.  There now, you hear,said the host, they confess it themselves.  They were taken toprison, therefore, and were to be tried.  When they saw thatthings were going so seriously, they were after all afraid,but at night the devil came and said, bear it just one daylonger, and do not spurn your luck, not one hair of your headshall be hurt.The next morning they were led to the bar, and the judge said,are you the murderers.  All three of us.  Why did you kill themerchant.  For money.  You wicked wretches, you have nohorror of your sins.  And quite right too.  They have confessed,and are still stubborn, said the judge, lead them to deathinstantly.  So they were taken out, and the host had to go withthem into the circle.  When they were taken hold of by theexecutioner's men, and were just going to be led up to thescaffold where the hangman was standing with naked sword,a coach drawn by four chestnut horses came up suddenly, drivingso fast that fire flashed from the stones, and someone madesigns from the window with awhite handkerchief.  Then said the hangman, it is a pardoncoming, and pardon, pardon, was called from the carriage also.Then the devil stepped out as a very noble gentleman,beautifully dressed, and said, you three are innocent.  Youmay now speak, make known what you have seen and heard.  Thensaid the eldest, we did not kill the merchant, the murdereris standing there in the circle, and he pointed to the innkeeper.In proof of this, go into his cellar, where many others whom hehas killed are still hanging.  Then the judge sent theexecutioner's men thither, and they found it was as theapprentices said, and when they had informed the judge of this,he caused the innkeeper to be led up, and his head was cut off.Then said the devil to the three, now I have got the soul whichI wanted to have, and you are free, and have money for therest of your lives.In a certain village there once lived a man and his wife, andthe wife was so lazy that she would never work at anything.Whatever her husband gave her to spin, she did not get done,and what she did spin she did not wind, but let it all remainentangled in a heap.  If the man scolded her, she was alwaysready with her tongue, and said, well, how should I wind it,when I have no reel.  Just you go into the forest and get meone.  If that is all, said the man, then I will go into theforest, and get some wood for making reels.  Then the womanwas afraid that if he had the wood he would make her a reelof it, and she would have to wind her yarnoff, and then begin to spin again.  She bethought herself alittle, and then a lucky idea occurred to her, and shesecretly followed the man into the forest, and when he hadclimbed into a tree to choose and cut the wood, she creptinto the thicket below where he could not see her, and cried,     he who cuts wood for reels shall die,     and he who winds, shall perish.The man listened, laid down his axe for a moment, and beganto consider what that could mean.  Well, he said at last,what can that have been, my ears must have been singing, Iwon't alarm myself for nothing.  So he once more seized theaxe, and began to hew.  Then again there came a cry frombelow,     he who cuts wood for reels shall die,     and he who winds, shall perish.He stopped, and felt afraid and alarmed, and pondered overthe circumstance.  But when a few moments had passed, he tookheart again, and a third time he stretched out his hand forthe axe, and began to cut.  But someone called out a thirdtime, and said loudly,     he who cuts wood for reels shall die,     and he who winds, shall perish.That was enough for him, and all inclination had departedfrom him, so he hastily descended the tree, and set out onhis way home.  The woman ran as fast as she could by bywaysso as to get homefirst.  So when he entered the parlor, she put on aninnocent look as if nothing had happened, and said, well,have you brought a nice piece of wood for reels.  No, said he,I see very well that winding won't do, and told her what hadhappened to him in the forest, and from that time forth lefther in peace about it.  Neverthless after some time, the managain began to complain of the disorder in the house.  Wife,said he, it is really a shame that the spun yarn should liethere all entangled.  I'll tell you what, said she, as westill don't come by any reel, go you up into the loft, and Iwill stand down below, and will throw the yarn up to you,and you will throw it down to me, and so we shall get askein after all.  Yes, that will do, said the man.  So theydid that, and when it was done, he said, the yarn is inskeins, now it must be boiled.  The woman was againdistressed, and said, yes, we will boil it to-morrow morningearly.  But she was secretly contriving another trick.Early in the morning she got up, lighted a fire, and put thekettle on, only instead of the yarn, she put in a lump of towand let it boil.  After that she went to the man who wasstill lying in bed, and said to him, I must just go out, youmust get up and look after the yarn which is in the kettle onthe fire, but you must be at hand at once, mind that, for ifthe cock should happen to crow, and you are not attending tothe yarn, it will become tow.  The man was willing and tookgood care not to loiter.  He got up as quickly as he could,and went into the kitchen.  But when he reached the kettleand peeped in, he saw, to his horror, nothing but a lump oftow.  Then the poor man was as still as a mouse, thinkinghe had neglected it, and was to blame, and in future saidno more about yarn and spinning.  But you yourself must ownthat she was an odious woman.A peasant had a faithful horse which had grown old and coulddo no more work, so his master would no longer give himanything to eat and said, I can certainly make no more useof you, but still I mean well by you, if you prove yourselfstill strong enough to bring me a lion here, I will maintainyou, but now take yourself away out of my stable.  And withthat he chased him into the open country.  The horse wassad, and went to the forest to seek a little protection therefrom the weather.  Then the fox met him and said, why do youhang your head so, and go about all alone.  Alas, replied thehorse, avarice and fidelity do not dwell together in onehouse.  My master has forgotten what services I haveperformed for him for so many years, and because I can nolonger plough well, he will give me no more food, and hasdriven me out.  Without giving you a chance, asked the fox.The chance was a bad one.  He said, if I were still strongenough to bring him a lion, he would keep me, but he wellknows that I cannot do that.  The fox said, I will help you,just lay yourself down, stretch yourself out as if you weredead, and do not stir.  The horse did as the fox desired,and the fox went to the lion, who had his den not far off,and said, a dead horse is lying outside there, just comewith me, you can have a rich meal.  The lion went withhim, and when theywere both standing by the horse the fox said, after all, itis not very convenient for you here - I tell you what - Iwill fasten it to you by the tail, and then you can drag itinto your cave, and devour it in peace.This advice pleased the lion, he lay down, and in order thatthe fox might tie the horse fast to him, he kept quite quiet.But the fox tied the lion's legs together with the horse'stail, and twisted and fastened all so well and so stronglythat no strength could break it.  When he had finished hiswork, he tapped the horse on the shoulder and said, pull,white horse, pull.  Then up sprang the horse at once, anddrew the lion away with him.  The lion began to roar sothat all the birds in the forest flew out in terror, butthe horse let him roar, and drew him and dragged him overthe country to his master's door.  When the master saw thelion, he was of a better mind, and said to the horse, youshall stay with me and fare well, and he gave him plentyto eat until he died.The Lord God had created all animals, and had chosen out the wolf tobe his dog, but he had forgotten the goat.  Then the devil madeready and began to create also, and created goats with fine longtails.  Now when they went to pasture, they generally remainedcaught in the hedges by their tails, whereupon the devil had to goand disentangle them, with a great deal of trouble.  This enragedhim at last, and he went and bit off the tail of every goat, as maybe seen to this day by the stump.Then he let them go to pasture alone, but it came to pass that theLord God perceived how at one time they gnawed away at a fruitfultree, at another injured the noble vines, or destroyed other tenderplants.  This distressed him, so that in his goodness and mercy hesummoned his wolves, who soon tore in pieces the goats that wentthere.  When the devil observed this, he went before the Lord andsaid, your creatures have destroyed mine.  The Lord answered, whydid you create things to do harm.  The devil said, I was compelledto do it, inasmuch as my thoughts run on evil.  What Icreate can have no other nature, and you must pay me heavy damages.I will pay you as soon as the oak leaves fall, come then, your moneywill then be ready counted out.  When the oak-leaves had fallen, thedevil came and demanded what was due to him.  But the Lord said, inthe church of constantinople stands a tall oaktree which still hasall its leaves.  With raging and curses, the devil departed, andwent to seek the oak, wandered in the wilderness for six monthsbefore he found it, and when he returned, all the oaks had in themeantime covered themselves again with green leaves.  Then he had toforfeit his indemnity, and in his rage he put out the eyes of allthe remaining goats, and put his own in instead.This is why all goats have devil's eyes, and their tails bitten off,and why he likes to assume their shape.There was once a sorcerer who was standing in the midst of agreat crowd of people performing his wonders.  He had a cockbrought in, which lifted a heavy beam and carried it as ifit were light as a feather.  But a girl was present who hadjust found a four-leaved clover, and had thus become so wisethat no deception could stand out against her, and she sawthat the beam was nothing but a straw.  So she cried, youpeople, do you not see that it is a straw that the cock iscarrying, and no beam.  Immediately the enchantment vanished,and the people saw what it was, and drove the magician awayin shame and disgrace.  He, however, full of inward anger,said, I will soon revenge myself.After some time the girl's wedding-day came, and she wasdecked out, and went in a great procession over the fields tothe place where the church was.  All at once she came to astream which was very much swollen, and there was no bridgeand no plank to cross it.  Then the bride nimbly took herclothes up, and wanted to wade through it.  And just as shewas thus standing in the water, a man, and it was thesorcerer, cried mockingly close beside her, aha.  Where areyour eyes that you take that for water.  Then her eyes wereopened, and she saw that she was standing with her clotheslifted up in the middle of a field that was blue with theflowers of blue flax.  Then all the people saw it likewise,and chased her away with ridicule and laughter.There was once an old woman, but you have surely seen an oldwoman go a-begging before now.  This woman begged likewise,and when she got anything she said, may God reward you.  Thebeggar-woman came to a door, and there by the fire a friendlyrogue of a boy was standing warming himself.  The boy saidkindly to the poor old woman as she was standing shiveringthus by the door, come, old mother, and warm yourself.  Shecame in, but stood too near the fire, so that her old ragsbegan to burn, and she was not aware of it.  The boy stoodand saw that, but he ought to have put the flames out.  Is itnot true that he ought to have put them out.  And if he hadnot any water, then he should have wept all the water inhis body out of his eyes, and that would have supplied twopretty streams with which to extinguish them.There was once on a time a maiden who was pretty, but idleand negligent.  When she had to spin she was so out oftemper that if there was a little knot in the flax, sheat once pulled out a whole heap of it, and strewed it abouton the ground beside her.  Now she had a servant who wasindustrious, and gathered together the bits of flax whichwere thrown away, cleaned them, spun them fine, and had abeautiful gown made out of them for herself.  A young manhad wooed the lazy girl, and the wedding was to take place.On the eve of the wedding, the industrious one was dancingmerrily about in her pretty dress, and the bride said, ah,how that girl does jump about, dressed in my hurds.The bridegroom heard that, and asked the bride what she meantby it.  Then she told him that the girl was wearing a dressmade of the flax which she had thrown away.  When thebridegroom heard that, and saw how idle she was, and howindustrious the poor girl was, he gave her up and went to theother, and chose her as his wife.In the time of schlauraffen I went forth and saw rome and thelateran hanging by a small silken thread, and a man without feet whooutran a swift horse, and a keen sharp sword that cut through abridge.  I saw a young ass with a silver nose which pursued twofleet hares, and a lime-tree that was very large, on which hot cakeswere growing.  I saw a lean old goat which carried about a hundredcart-loads of fat on his body, and sixty loads of salt.  Have I nottold enough lies.  I saw a plough ploughing without horse or cow,and a child of one year threw four millstones from ratisbon totreves, and from treves to strasburg, and a hawk swam over therhine, which he had a perfect right to do.  I heard some fishesbegin to make such a disturbance with each other, that it resoundedas far as heaven, and sweet honey flowed like water from a deepvalley to the top of a high mountain, and these were strange things.There were two crows which were mowing a meadow, and I saw two gnatsbuilding a bridge, and two doves tore a wolf to pieces, two childrenbrought forth two kids, and two frogs threshed corntogether.  I saw two mice consecrating a bishop, and two catsscratching out a bear's tongue.  Then a snail came running up andkilled two furious lions.  There stood a barber and shaved a woman'sbeard off, and two sucking-children bade their mother hold hertongue.  There I saw two greyhounds which brought a mill out of thewater, and a broken-down old horse was beside it, and said it wasright.  And four horses were standing in the yard threshing cornwith all their might, and two goats were heating the stove, and ared cow shot the bread into the oven.  Then a hen crowed,cock-a-doodle-doo.  The story is all told, cock-a-doodle-doo.I will tell you something.  I saw two roasted fowls flying,they flew quickly and had their breasts turned to heaven andtheir backs to hell, and an anvil and a mill-stone swam acrossthe rhine prettily, slowly, and gently, and a frog sat onthe ice at whitsuntide and ate a ploughshare.  Three fellowswho wanted to catch a hare, went on crutches and stilts, oneof them was deaf, the second blind, the third dumb, and thefourth could not stir a step.  Do you want to know how it wasdone.  First, the blind man saw the hare running across thefield, the dumb one called to the lame one, and the lame oneseized it by the neck.There were certain men who wished to sail on dry land, andthey set their sails in the wind, and sailed away over greatfields.  Then they sailed over a high mountain, and therethey were miserably drowned.  A crab was chasing a hare whichwas running away at full speed, and high up on the roof laya cow which had climbed up there.  In that country the fliesare as big as the goats are here.  Open the window that thelies may fly out.Three women were transformed into flowers which grew inthe field, but one of them was allowed to be in her own home atnight.  Then once when day was drawing near, and she was forced togo back to her companions in the field and become a flower again,she said to her husband, if you will come this afternoon andgather me, I shall be set free and henceforth stay with you.  Andhe did so.  Now the question is, how did her husband know her, forthe flowers were exactly alike, and without any difference.Answer - as she was at her home during the night and not in thefield, no dew fell on her as it did on the others, and by thisher husband knew her.How fortunate is the master, and how well all goes in hishouse, when he has a wise servant who listens to his ordersand does not obey them, but prefers following his own wisdom.  Aclever Hans of this kind was once sent out by his master to seek alost cow.  He stayed away a long time, and the master thought,faithful Hans does not spare any pains over his work.  But whenhe did not come back at all, the master was afraid lest somemisfortune had befallen him, and set out himself to look forhim.  He had to search a long time, but at last he caught sightof the boy running up and down a large field.  Now, dear Hans,said the master when he had got up to him, have you found the cowwhich I sent you toseek.  No, master, he answered, I have not found the cow, butthen I have not looked for it.  Then what have you looked for,Hans.  Three blackbirds, answered the boy.  And where are they,asked the master.  I see one of them, I hear the other, and Iam running after the third, answered the wise boy.Take example by this, do not trouble yourselves about yourmasters or their orders, but rather do what comes into yourhead and pleases you, and then you will act just as wisely asclever Hans.Once upon a time a poor pious peasant died, and arrived beforethe gate of heaven.  At the same time a very rich, rich lordcame there who also wanted to get into heaven.  Then saintpeter came with the key, and opened the door, and let thegreat man in, but apparently did not see the peasant, and shutthe door again.  And now the peasant outside heard how thegreat man was received in heaven with all kinds of rejoicing,and how they were making music, and singing within.  At lengthall became quiet again, and saint peter came and opened the gateof heaven, and let the peasant in.  The peasant, however,expected that they would make music and sing when he went inalso, but all remained quite quiet.  He was received with greataffection, it is true, and the angels came to meet him, but noone sang.  Then the peasant asked saint peter how it was thatthey did not sing for him as they had done when the rich manwent in, and said that it seemed to him that there in heaventhings were done with just as much partiality as on earth.  Thensaid saint peter, by no means, you are just as dear to us asanyone else, and will enjoy every heavenly delight that therich man enjoys, but poor fellows like you come to heaven everyday, but a rich man like this does not come more than once in ahundred years.Lean lisa was of a very different way of thinking from lazyharry and fat trina, who never let anything disturb theirpeace.  She slaved away from morning till evening, andburdened her husband, long laurence, with so much work thathe had heavier weights to carry than an ass with three sacks.But it wasall to no purpose, for they had nothing and came to nothing.One night as she lay in bed, and could hardly move one limb forweariness, she still did not allow her thoughts to go to sleep.She thrust her elbow into her husband's side, and said, listen,lenz, to what I have been thinking.  If I were to find one florinand one was given to me, I would borrow another to put to them,and you too should give me another, and then as soon as I hadgot the four florins together, I would buy a young cow.  Thispleased the husband right well.  It is true, said he, that I donot know where I am to get the florin which you want as a giftfrom me.  But, if you can get the money together, and can buy acow with it, you will do well to carry out your project.  I shallbe glad, he added, if the cow has a calf, and then I shall oftenget a drink of milk to refresh me.  The milk is not for you, saidthe woman, we must let the calf suck that it may become big andfat, and we may be able to sell it well.  Certainly, replied theman, but still we will take a little milk.  That will do no harm.Who has taught you to manage cows,said the woman.  Whether it does harm or not, I will not allow it,and even if you were to stand on your head for it, you should nothave a drop of the milk.  Do you think, because there is nosatisfying you, long laurence, that you are to eat up what I earnwith so much difficulty.  Wife, said the man, be quiet, or I willgive you a blow on your mouth.  What, cried she, you threaten me,you glutton, you rascal, you lazy harry.  She was just layinghold of his hair, but long laurence got up, seized both leanlisa's withered arms in one hand, and with the other he presseddown her head into the pillow, let her scold, and held her untilshe fell asleep for very weariness.  Whether she continued towrangle when she awoke next morning, or whether she went out tolook for the florin which she wanted to find, that I know not.There was once a tailor, who was a quarrelsome fellow, andhis wife, who was good, industrious, and pious, never couldplease him.  Whatever she did, he was not satisfied, butgrumbled and scolded, and knocked her about and beat her.  Asthe authorities at last heard of it, they had him summonedand put in prison in order to make him better.  He was keptfor a while on bread and water, and then set free again.  Hewas forced, however, to promise not to beat his wife anymore, but to live with her in peace, and share joy andsorrow with her, as married people ought to do.  All wenton well for a time, but then he fell into his old ways andwas surly and quarrelsome.  And because he dared not beat her,he would seize her by the hair and tear it out.  The womanescaped from him, and sprang out into the yard, but he ranafter her with his yard-measure and scissors, and chased herabout, and threw the yard-measure and scissors at her, andwhatever else came his way.  When he hit her he laughed, andwhen he missed her, he stormed and swore.  This went on so longthat the neighbors came to the wife's assistance.  The tailorwas again summoned before the magistrates, and reminded of hispromise.  Dear gentlemen, said he, I have kept my word, I havenot beaten her, but have shared joy and sorrow with her.  Howcan that be, said the judge, as she continues to bring suchheavy complaints against you.  I have not beaten her, but justbecause she looked so strange I wanted to comb her hair withmy hand.  She, however, got away from me, and left me quitespitefully.  Then I hurried after her, and in order to bringher back to her duty, I threw at her as a well-meant reminderwhatever came readily to hand.  I have shared joy and sorrowwith her also, for whenever I hit her I was full of joy andshe of sorrow, and if I missed her, then she was joyful, and Isorry.  The judges were not satisfied with this answer, butgave him the reward he deserved.In olden times every sound still had its meaning and significance.When the smith's hammer resounded, it cried, "Strike away, strikeaway."  When the carpenter's plane grated, it said, "Here goes, heregoes."  If the mill wheel began to clack, it said, "Help, Lord God,help, Lord God."  And if the miller was a cheat and set the milla-going, it spoke high german, and first asked slowly, "Who isthere?  Who is there?"  And then answered quickly, "The miller,the miller."  And at last quite in a hurry, "He steals bravely,He steals bravely, three pecks in a bushel."
At this time the birds also had their own language which everyone understood.  Now it only sounds like chirping, screeching, andwhistling, and sometimes like music without words.  It came intothe birds' mind, however, that they would no longer be without aruler, and would choose one of themselves to be their king.  Onealone among them, the green plover, was opposed to this.  Hehad lived free and would die free, and anxiously flying hitherand thither, he cried, "Where shall I go?  Where shall I go?"  Heretired into a solitary and unfrequented marsh, and showed himselfno more among his fellows.
The birds now wished to discuss the matter, and on a fine maymorning they all gathered together from the woods and fields,eagles and chaffinches, owls and crows, larks and sparrows, howcan I name them all.  Even the cuckoo came, and the hoopoe, hisclerk, who is so called because he is always heard a few daysbefore him, and a very small bird which as yet had no name,mingled with the band.  The hen, which by some accident hadheard nothing of the whole matter, was astonished at the greatassemblage.  What, what, what is going to be done, she cackled.But the cock calmed his beloved hen, and said, only a lot ofrich people, and told her what they had on hand.  It wasdecided that the one who could fly the highest should be king.A tree-frog which was sitting among the bushes, when he heardthat, cried a warning, no, no, no, no, because he thought thatmany tears would be shed because of this.  But the crow said, caw,caw, and that all would pass off peaceably.
It was now determined that on this fine morning they should atonce begin to ascend, so that hereafter no one should be ableto say, I could easily have flown much higher, but the eveningcame on, and I could do no more.  On a given signal, therefore,the whole troop rose up in the air.  The dust ascended from theland, and there was tremendous fluttering and whirring andbeating of wings, and it looked as if a black cloud was risingup.  The little birds were soon left behind.  They could go nofarther, and fell back to the ground.  The larger birds heldout longer, but none could equal theeagle, who mounted so high that he could have plucked the eyesout of the sun.  And when he saw that the others could not getup to him, he thought, why should you fly still higher.  You arethe king, and began to let himself down again.  The birds beneathhim at once cried to him, you must be our king, no one has flownso high as you.  Except me, screamed the little fellow without aname, who had crept into the breast-feathers of the eagle.  Andas he was not at all tired, he rose up and mounted so high thathe reached heaven itself.  However, when he had gone as far asthis, he folded his wings together, and called down with clearand penetrating voice, I am king.  I am king.You, our king, cried the birds angrily.  You have managed itby trick and cunning.  So they made another condition.  Heshould be king who could go down lowest in the ground.  Howthe goose did flap about with its broad breast when it was oncemore on land.  How quickly the cock scratched a hole.  Theduck came off the worst of all, for she leapt into a ditch,but sprained her legs, and waddled away to a neighboring pond,crying, cheating, cheating.  The little bird without a name,however, sought out a mouse-hole, slipped down into it, andcried out of it with his small voice, I am king.  I am king.You our king, cried the birds still more angrily.  Do youthink your cunning shall prevail.  They determined to keep hima prisoner in the hole and starve him out.  The owl was placedas sentinel in front of it, and was not to let the rascal outif she had any value for her life.  When evening was come and allthe birds were feeling very tired after the exertion of so muchflying, they went to bed with their wives and children.The owl alone remained standing by the mouse-hole, gazingsteadfastly into it with her great eyes.  Then she, too, grewtired and thought to herself, you might certainly shut one eye,you will still watch with the other, and the little villainshall not come out of his hole.  So she shut one eye,and with the other looked straight at the mouse-hole.  Thelittle fellow put his head out and peeped, and wanted to slipaway, but the owl came forward immediately, and he drew his headback again.  Then the owl opened the one eye again, and shut theother, intending to shut them in turn all through thenight.  But when she next shut the one eye, she forgot to openthe other, and as soon as both her eyes were shut shefell asleep.  The little fellow soon observed that, and slippedaway.From that day forth, the owl has never dared to show herself bydaylight, for if she does the other birds chase her and pluck herfeathers out.  She flies out only by night, but hates andpursues mice because they make such ugly holes.  The littlebird, too, is very unwilling to let himself be seen,because he is afraid it will cost him his life if he is caught.He steals about in the hedges, and when he is quite safe, hesometimes cries, I am king, and for this reason, the otherbirds call him in mockery, king of the hedges.  No one, however,was so happy as the lark at not having to obey the littleking.  As soon as the sun appears, she ascends high in the airand cries, ah, how beautiful that is.  Beautiful that is.Beautiful'beautiful.  Ah, how beautiful that is.The fishes had for a long time been discontented because noorder prevailed in their kingdom.  None of them turnedaside for the others, but all swam to the right or the leftas they fancied, or darted between those who wanted tostay together, or got into their way.  And a strong one gavea weak one a blow with its tail, which drove it away, or elseswallowed it up without more ado.  How delightful it would be,said they, if we had a king who enforced law and justice among us,and they met together to choose for their ruler the one who couldcleave through the water most quickly, and give help to theweak ones.They placed themselves in rank and file by the shore, and thepike gave the signal with his tail, on which they all started.Like an arrow, the pike darted away, and with him the herring,the gudgeon, the perch, the carp, and all the rest of them.Even the sole swam with them, and hoped to win the race.All at once, the cry was heard, the herring is first, theherring is first.  Who is first, screamed angrily the flat envioussole, who had been left far behind,  who is first.  The herring,the herring, was the answer.  The naked herring, cried thejealous creature, the naked herring.  Since that time the solehas been punished by having been given a mouth on one side.Where do you like best to feed your flocks, said a manto an old cowherd.  Here, sir, where the grass is neithertoo rich nor too poor, or else it is no use.  Why not,asked the man.  Do you hear that melancholy cry from the meadowthere, answered the cowherd, that is the bittern.  He was oncea cowherd, and so was the hoopoe also, I will tell you thestory.  The bittern pastured his flocks on rich green meadows whereflowers grew in abundance, so his cows became wild and unmanageable.The hoopoe drove his cattle on to high barren hills, where thewind plays with the sand, and his cows became thin, and got nostrength.  When it was evening, and the cowherds wantedto drive their cows homewards, the bittern could not get histogether again.  They were too high-spirited, and ran away fromhim.  He called, come, cows, come, but it was of no use.  Theytook no notice of his calling.  The hoopoe, however, could noteven get his cows up ontheir legs, so faint and weak had they become.  Up, up, up, screamedhe, but it was in vain, they remained lying on the sand.That is the way when one has no moderation.  And to this day,though they have no flocks now to watch, the bittern cries,come, cows, come, and the hoopoe, up, up, up.Two or three hundred years ago, when people were far from being socrafty and cunning as they are nowadays, an extraordinary eventtook place in a little town.  By some mischance one of the greatowls, called horned owls, had come from the neighboring woods intothe barn of one of the townsfolk in the night-time, and when daybroke did not dare to venture forth again from her retreat, forfear of the other birds, which raised a terrible outcry whenevershe appeared.  In the morning when the man-servant went into thebarn to fetch some straw, he was so mightily alarmed at the sightof the owl sitting there in a corner, that he ran away andannounced to his master that a monster, the like of which he hadnever set eyes on in his life, and which could devour a manwithout the slightest difficulty, was sitting in the barn, rollingits eyes about in its head.  I know your kind, said the master,you have courage enough to chase a blackbird about the fields, butwhen you see a hen lying dead, you have to get a stick before yougo near it.  I must go and see for myself what kind of a monsterit is, added the master, and went quite boldly into the granaryand looked round him.  When, however, he saw with his own eyesthe strange grim creature, he was no less terrified than theservant had been.  With two bounds he sprang out, ran to hisneighbours, and begged them imploringly to lend him assistanceagainst an unknown and dangerous beast, or else the whole townmight be in danger if itwere to break loose out of the barn, where it was shut up.  Agreat noise and clamor arose in all the streets, the townsmencame armed with spears, hay-forks, scythes, and axes, as if theywere going out against an enemy.  Finally, the senators appearedwith the burgomaster at their head.  When they had drawn up inthe market-place, they marched to the barn, and surrounded it onall sides.  Thereupon one of the most courageous of them steppedforth and entered with his spear lowered, but came running outimmediately afterwards with a shriek and as pale as death, andcould not utter a single word.  Yet two others ventured in, butthey fared no better.  At last one stepped forth, a great strongman who was famous for his warlike deeds, and said, you will notdrive away the monster by merely looking at him, we must be inearnest here, but I see that you have all tuned into women, andnot one of you dares to encounter the animal.  He ordered themto give him some armor, had a sword and spear brought, and armedhimself.  All praised his courage, though many feared for hislife.  The two barn-doors were opened, and they saw the owl, whichin the meantime had perched herself on the middle of a greatcross-beam.  He had a ladder brought, and when he raised it, andmade ready to climb up, they all cried out to him that he was tobear himself bravely, and commended him to St. George, who slewthe dragon.  When he had just got to the top, and the owlperceived that he had designs on her, and was also bewildered bythe crowd and the shouting, and knew not how to escape, sherolled her eyes, ruffled her feathers, flapped her wings,snapped her beak, and cried, tuwhit, tuwhoo, in a harsh voice.Strike home.  Strike home.  Screamed the crowd outside to thevaliant hero.  Any one who was standing where I am standing,answered he, would not cry, strike home.  He certainly did planthis foot one rung higher on the ladder, but then he began totremble, and half-fainting, went back again.And now there was no one left who dared to place himself in suchdanger.  The monster, said they, has poisoned and mortallywounded the very strongest man among us, by snapping at him andjust breathing on him.  Are we, too, to risk our lives.  They tookcounsel as to what they ought to do to prevent the whole town frombeing destroyed.  For a long time everything seemed to be of nouse, but at length the burgomaster found an expedient.  Myopinion, said he, is that we ought, out of the common purse, topay for this barn, and whatsoever corn, straw, or hay it contains,and thus indemnify the owner, and then burn down the wholebuilding and the terrible beast with it.  Thus no one will have toendanger his life.  This is no time for thinking of expense,and stinginess would be ill applied.  All agreed with him.  Sothey set fire to the barn at all four corners, and with it theowl was miserably burnt.  Let any one who will not believe it,go thither and inquire for himself.In days gone by there was a land where the nights were always dark,and the sky spread over it like a black cloth, for there the moonnever rose, and no star shone in the gloom.  At the creation ofthe world, the light at night had been sufficient.  Three youngfellows once went out of this country on a traveling expedition,and arrived in another kingdom, where, in the evening when the sunhad disappeared behind the mountains, a shining globe was placedon an oak-tree, which shed a soft light far and wide.  By meansof this, everything could very well be seen and distinguished,even though it was not so brilliant as the sun.  The travelersstopped andasked a countryman who was driving past with his cart, what kindof a light that was.  That is the moon, answered he, our mayorbought it for three talers, and fastened it to the oak-tree.  Hehas to pour oil into it daily, and to keep it clean, so that itmay always burn clearly.  He receives a taler a week from usfor doing it.When the countryman had driven away, one of them said, we couldmake some use of this lamp, we have an oak-tree at home, which isjust as big as this, and we could hang it on that.  What apleasure it would be not to have to feel about at night in thedarkness.  I'll tell you what we'll do, said the second, we willfetch a cart and horses and carry away the moon.  The people heremay buy themselves another.  I'm a good climber, said the third, Iwill bring it down.  The fourth brought a cart and horses, and thethird climbed the tree, bored a hole in the moon, passed a ropethrough it, and let it down.  When the shining ball lay in thecart, they covered it over with a cloth, that no one might observethe theft.  They conveyed it safely into their own country, andplaced it on a high oak.  Old and young rejoiced, when the newlamp let its light shine over the whole land, and bed-rooms andsitting-rooms were filled with it.  The dwarfs came forth fromtheir caves in the rocks, and the tiny elves in their little redcoats danced in rings on the meadows.The four took care that the moon was provided with oil, cleanedthe wick, and received their weekly taler, but they became oldmen, and when one of them grew ill, and saw that he was about todie, he appointed that one quarter of the moon, should, as hisproperty, be laid in the grave with him.  When he died, the mayorclimbed up the tree, and cut off a quarter with the hedge-shears,and this was placed in his coffin.  The light of the moondecreased, but still not visibly.  When the second died, thesecond quarter was buried with him, and the light diminished.  Itgrew weaker still after the death of the third, who likewise tookhis part of it away with him, and when the fourth was borne to hisgrave, the old state of darkness recommenced, and whenever thepeople went out at night without their lanterns they knockedtheir heads together in collision.When, however, the pieces of the moon had united themselvestogether again in the world below, where darkness had alwaysprevailed, it came to pass that the dead became restless and awokefrom their sleep.  They were astonished when they were able tosee again, the moonlight was quite sufficient for them, for theireyes had become so weak that they could not have borne thebrilliance of the sun.  They rose up and were merry, and fellinto their former ways of living.  Some of them went to the playand to dance, others hastened to the public-houses, where theyasked for wine, got drunk, brawled, quarreled, and at last tookup cudgels, and belabored each other.  The noise became greater andgreater, and at last reached even to heaven.St. Peter, who guards the gate of heaven, thought the lower worldhad broken out in revolt and gathered together the heavenly hosts,which were employed to drive back the evil one when he and hisassociates storm the abode of the blessed.  As these, however,did not come, he got on his horse and rode through the gate ofheaven, down into the world below.  There he reduced the dead tosubjection, bade them lie down in their graves again, took themoon away with him, and hung it up in heaven.When God created the world and was about to fix the length ofeach creature's life, the ass came and asked, Lord, how long shallI live.  Thirty years, replied God, does that content you.  Ah,Lord, answered the ass, that is a long time.  Think of my painfulexistence.  To carry heavy burdens from morning to night, to dragsacks of corn to the mill that others may eat bread, to becheered and refreshed with nothing but blows and kicks.  Relieveme of a portion of this long time.  Then God had pity on him andrelieved him of eighteen years.  The ass went away comforted, andthe dog appeared.  How long would you like to live, said God tohim, thirty years are too many for the ass, but you will besatisfied with that.  Lord, answered the dog, is that thy will.Consider how I shall have to run, my feet will never hold out solong, and when I have once lost my voice for barking, and my teethfor biting, what will be left for me to do but run from onecorner to another and growl.  God saw that he was right, andreleased him from twelve years of life.  Then came the monkey.You will certainly live thirty years willingly, said the Lord tohim, you have no need to work as the ass and the dog have to, andwill always enjoy yourself.  Ah, Lord, he answered, it may seemas if that were the case, but it is quite different.  When itrains millet-porridge I have no spoon.  I am always to play merrypranks, and make faces which force people to laugh, and if theygive me an apple, and I bite into it, why, it is sour.  How oftensadness hides itself behind mirth.  I shall never be able to holdout for thirty years.  God was gracious and took off ten.At last man appeared, joyous, healthy and vigorous, and beggedGod to appoint his time for him.  Thirty years shall you live,said the Lord.  Is that enough for you.  What a short time, criedman, when I have built my house and my fire burns on my ownhearth, when I have planted trees which blossom and bear fruit,and am just intending to enjoy my life, I am to die.  O Lord,lengthen my time.  I will add to it the ass's eighteen years, saidGod.  That is not enough, replied the man.  You shall also havethe dog's twelve years.  Still too little.  Well, then, said God,I will give you the monkey's ten years also, but more you shallnot have.  The man went away, but was not satisfied.So man lives seventy years.  The first thirty are his humanyears, which are soon gone, then is he healthy, merry, works withpleasure, and is glad of his life.  Then follow the ass'seighteen years, when one burden after another is laid on him, hehas to carry the corn which feeds others, and blows and kicks arethe reward of his faithful services.  Then comes the dog's twelveyears, when he lies in the corner, and growls and has no longerany teeth to bite with, and when this time is over the monkey'sten years form the end.  Then man is weak-headed and foolish,does silly things, and becomes the jest of children.In ancient times a giant was once traveling on a great highway,when suddenly an unknown man sprang up before him, and said,halt, not one step farther.  What.  Cried the giant, a creaturewhom I can crush between my fingers, wants to block my way.  Whoare you that you dare to speak so boldly.  I am death, answeredthe other.  No one resists me, and you also must obey my commands.But the giant refused, and began to struggle with death.  It wasa long, violent battle, in which at last the giant gotthe upper hand, and struck death down with his fist, so that hecollapsed by a stone.  The giant went his way, and death lay thereconquered, and so weak that he could not get up again.  What willbe done now, said he, if I stay lying here in a corner.  No onewill die in the world, and it will get so full of people that theywon't have room to stand beside each other.  In the meantime ayoung man came along the road, who was strong and healthy,singing a song, and glancing around on every side.  When he sawthe half-fainting one, he went compassionately to him, raised himup, poured a strengthening draught out of his flask for him, andwaited till he regained some strength.  Do you know, said thestranger, whilst he was getting up, who I am, and who it is whomyou have helped on his legs again.  No, answered the youth, I donot know you.  I am death, said he, I spare no one, and can makeno exception with you - but that you may see that I am grateful,I promise you that I will not fall on you unexpectedly, but willsend my messengers to you before I come and take you away.  Well,said the youth, it is something gained that I shall know whenyou come, and at any rate be safe from you for so long.  Then hewent on his way, and was light-hearted, and enjoyed himself,and livedwithout thought.  But youth and health did not last long.  Sooncame sicknesses and sorrows, which tormented him by day, and tookaway his rest by night.  Die, I shall not, said he to himself, fordeath will send his messengers before that, but I do wish thesewretched days of sickness were over.  As soon as he felthimself well again he began once more to live merrily.  Then oneday someone tapped him on the shoulder.  He looked round, anddeath stood behind him, and said, follow me, the hour of yourdeparture from this world has come.  What, replied the man, willyou break your word.  Did you not promise me that you would sendyour messengers to me before coming yourself.  I have seen none.Silence, answered death.  Have I not sent one messenger to youafter another.  Did not fever come and smite you, and shake you,and cast you down.  Has not dizziness bewildered your head.  Hasnot gout twitched you in all your limbs.  Did not your ears sing.Did not tooth-ache bite into your cheeks.  Was it not dark beforeyour eyes.  And besides all that, has not my own brother sleepreminded you every night of me.  Did you not lie by night as ifyou were already dead.  The man could make no answer, he yieldedto his fate, and went away with death.Master pfriem was a short, thin, but lively man, who neverrested a moment.  His face, of which his turned-up nose wasthe only prominent feature, was marked with smallpox and pale asdeath.  His hair was gray and shaggy, his eyes small, but theyglanced perpetually about on all sides.  He saw everything,criticized everything, knew everything best, and was always inthe right.  When he went into the streets, he moved his armsabout as if he were rowing, and once he struck the pail of a girlso high in the air that he himself was wetted all over by thewater she was carrying.  Idiot.  Cried he to her, shakinghimself, could you not see that I was coming behind you.  By tradehe was a shoemaker, and when he worked he pulled his thread outwith such force that he drove his fist into everyone who did notkeep far enough off.  No apprentice stayed more than a month withhim, for he had always some fault to find with the very best work.At one time it was that the stitches were not even, at anotherthat one shoe was too long, or one heel higher than the other,or the leather not cut large enough.  Wait, said he to hisapprentice, I will soon show you how we make skins soft.  Andhe brought a strap and gave him a couple of lashes across theback.  He called them all sluggards.  Hehimself did not turn much work out of his hands, for he never satstill for a quarter of an hour.  If his wife got up very early inthe morning and lighted the fire, he jumped out of bed, and ranbarefooted into the kitchen, crying, will you burn my house downfor me.  That is a fire one could roast an ox by.  Does wood costnothing.  If the servants were standing by their wash-tubs andlaughing, and telling each other what they knew, he scolded them,and said, there stand the geese cackling, and forgetting theirwork, to gossip.  And why fresh soap.  Disgraceful extravaganceand shameful idleness into the bargain.  They want to save theirhands, and not rub the things properly.  And out he would run andknock a pail full of soap and water over, so that the wholekitchen was flooded.  Someone was building a new house, so hehurrried to the window to look on.  There, they are using thatred sand-stone again that never dries, cried he.  No one willever be healthy in that house.  And just look how badly thefellows are laying the stones.  Besides, the mortar is good fornothing.  It ought to have gravel in it, not sand.  I shall liveto see that house tumble down on the people who are in it.He sat down, put a couple of stitches in, and then jumped upagain, unfastened his leather-apron, and cried, I will just goout, and appeal to those men's consciences.  He stumbled on thecarpenters.  What's this, cried he, you are not working by theline.  Do you expect the beams to be straight - one wrong willput all wrong.  He snatched an axe out of a carpenter's hand andwanted to show him how he ought to cut, but as a cart loadedwith clay came by, he threw the axe away, and hastened to thepeasant who was walking by the side of it, you are not in yourright mind, said he, who yokes young horses to a heavily-ladencart.  The poor beasts will die on the spot.  The peasant didnot give him an answer, and pfriem in a rage ran back into hiswork-shop.  When he was setting himself to work again, theapprentice reached him a shoe.  Well, what's that again, screamedhe, haven't I told you you ought not to cut shoes so broad.  Whowould buy a shoe like this, which is hardly anything else but asole.  I insist on my orders being followed exactly.  Master,answered the apprentice, you may easily be quite right about theshoe being a bad one, but it is the one which you yourself cutout, and yourself set to work at.  When you jumped up a whileago, you knocked it off the table, and I have only just picked itup.  An angel from heaven, however, would never make you believethat.One night master pfriem dreamed he was dead, and on his way toheaven.  When he got there, he knocked loudly at the door.  Iwonder, said he to himself, that they have no knocker on the door,one knocks one's knuckles sore.  The apostle peter opened the door,and wanted to see who demanded admission so noisily.  Ah, it's youmaster pfriem, said he, well, I'll let you in, but I warn youthat you must give up that habit of yours, and find fault withnothing you see in heaven, or you may fare ill.  You might havespared your warning, answered pfriem.  I know already what isseemly, and here, God be thanked, everything is perfect, and thereis nothing to blame as there is on earth.  So he went in, andwalked up and down the wide expanses of heaven.  He lookedaround him, to the left and to the right, but sometimes shook hishead, or muttered something to himself.  Then he saw two angelswho were carrying away a beam.  It was the beam which someone hadhad in his own eye whilst he was looking for the splinter in theeye of another.  They did not carry the beam lengthways,however, but obliquely.  Did anyone ever see such a piece ofstupidity, thought master pfriem.  But he said nothing, and seemedsatisfied with it.  It comes to the same thing after all,whichever way they carry the beam, straight or athwart, if theyonly get along with it, and truly I do not see them knock againstanything.  Soon after this he saw two angels who were drawingwater out of a well into a bucket, but at the same time heobserved that the bucket was full of holes, and that the waterwas running out of it on every side.  They were watering theearth with rain.  Hang it, he exclaimed, but happily recollectedhimself, and thought, perhaps it is only a pastime.  If it isan amusement, then it seems they can do useless things of thiskind, especially here in heaven, where people, as I have alreadynoticed, do nothing but idle about.  He went fartherand saw a cart which had stuck fast in a deep hole.  It's nowonder, said he to the man who stood by, who would load sounreasonably.  What have you there.  Good wishes, replied the man,I could not get on the right way with it, but still I have pushedit safely up here, and here they won't leave me stuck.  In factan angel did come and harness two horses to it.  That's quiteright, thought pfriem, but two horses won't get that cart out, itmust at least have four to it.  Another angel came and broughttwo more horses, she did not harness them in front of it,however, but behind.  That was too much for master pfriem, clumsycreature, he burst out, what are you doing there.  Has anyoneever since the world began seen a cart drawn in that way.  Butyou, in your conceited arrogance, think that you know everythingbest.  He was going to say more, but one of the inhabitants ofheaven seized him by the throat and pushed him forth withirresistible strength.  Beneath the gateway master pfriem turnedhis head round to take one more look at the cart, and saw that itwas being raised into the air by four winged horses.At this moment master pfriem awoke.  Things are certainlyarranged in heaven otherwise than they are on earth, said he tohimself, and that excuses much, but who can see horses harnessedboth behind and before with patience.  To be sure they had wingsbut who could know that.  It is, beside, great folly to fix apair of wings to a horse that has four legs to run with already.But I must get up, or else they will make nothing but mistakesin my house.  It is a lucky thing though, that I am notreally dead.A tailor and a goldsmith were traveling together, and one eveningwhen the sun had sunk behind the mountains, they heard the soundof distant music, which became more and more distinct.  It soundedstrange, but so pleasant that they forgot all their wearinessand stepped quickly onwards.  The moon had already arisenwhen they reached a hill on which they saw a crowd of little menand women, who had taken each other's hands, and were whirlinground in the dance with the greatest pleasure and delight.They sang to it most charmingly, and that was the music which thetravelers had heard.  In the midst of them sat an old man who wasrather taller than the rest.  He wore a parti-colored coat, and hishoary beard hung down over his breast.  The two remained standingfull of astonishment, and watched the dance.  The old man madea sign that they should enter, and the little folks willingly openedtheir circle.  The goldsmith, who had a hump, and like allhunch-backs was daring enough, stepped in.  The tailor felt a littleafraid at first, and held back, but when he saw how merrily allwas going, he plucked up his courage, and followed.  The circleclosed again directly, and the little folks went on singing anddancing with the wildest leaps.  The old man, however, took alarge knife which hung to his girdle, whetted it, and when it wassufficiently sharpened, he looked round at the strangers.  Theywere terrified, but they had not much time for reflection, for theold man seized the goldsmith and with the greatest speed, shavedthe hair of his head clean off, and then the same thing happened tothe tailor.  But their fear left them when, after he had finishedhis work, the old man clapped them both on the shoulder in afriendly manner, as much as to say, they had behaved well to letall that be done to them willingly, and without any struggle.  Hepointed with his finger to a heap of coals which lay at one side,and signified to the travelers by his gestures that they were tofill their pockets with them.  Both of them obeyed, although theydid not know of what use the coals would be to them, andthen they went on their way to seek a shelter for the night.When they had got into the valley, the clock of the neighboringmonastery struck twelve, and the song ceased.  In a moment all hadvanished, and the hill lay in solitude in the moonlight.The two travelers found an inn, and covered themselves up on theirstraw-beds with their coats, but in their weariness forgot to takethe coals out of them before doing so.  A heavy weight on theirlimbs awakened them earlier than usual.  They felt in the pockets,and could not believe their eyes when they saw that they were notfilled with coals, but with pure gold.  Happily, too, the hair oftheir heads and beards was there again as thick as ever.They had now become rich folks, but the goldsmith, who, inaccordance with his greedy disposition, had filled his pocketsbetter, was twice as rich as the tailor.  A greedy man, even if hehas much,still wishes to have more, so the goldsmith proposed to the tailorthat they should wait another day, and go out again in the eveningin order to bring back still greater treasures from the old man onthe hill.  The tailor refused, and said, I have enough and amcontent.  Now I shall be a master, and marry my dear object -for so he called his sweetheart - and I am a happy man.  But hestayed another day to please him.  In the evening the goldsmithhung a couple of bags over his shoulders that he might be ableto stow away a great deal, and took the road to the hill.  Hefound, as on the night before, the little folks at their singingand dancing, and the old man again shaved him clean, and madesigns to him to take some coal.  He was not slow about stuffingas much into his bags as would go, went back quite delighted,and covered himself over with hiscoat.  Even if the gold does weigh heavily, said he, I will gladlybear that, and at last he fell asleep with the sweet anticipationof waking in the morning an enormously rich man.When he opened his eyes, he got up in haste to examine hispockets, but how amazed he was when he drew nothing out of thembut black coals, and that howsoever often he put his hands inthem.  The gold I got the night before is still there for me,thought he, and went and brought it out, but how shocked he was whenhe saw that it likewise had again turned into coal.  He smote hisforehead with his dusty black hand, and then he felt that hiswhole head was bald and smooth, as was also the place where hisbeard should have been.  But his misfortunes were not yet over.  Henow remarked for the first time that in addition to thehump on his back, a second, just as large, had grown in front onhis breast.  Then he recognized the punishment of hisgreediness, and began to weep aloud.  The good tailor, who wasawakened by this, comforted the unhappy fellow as well as he could,and said, you have been my comrade in my traveling time.  You shallstay with me and share in my wealth.  He kept his word, but thepoor goldsmith was obliged to carry the two humps as long as helived, and to cover his bald head with a cap.A certain tailor who was great at boasting but ill at doing,took it into his head to go abroad for a while, and look aboutthe world.  As soon as he could manage it, he left hiswork-shop, and wandered on his way, over hill and dale,sometimes hither, sometimes, thither, but ever on and on.  Once onhis way he perceived in the blue distance a steep hill, and behindit a towerreaching to the clouds, which rose up out of a wild dark forest.Thunder and lightning, cried the tailor, what is that, and as hewas strongly goaded by curiosity, he went boldly towards it. Buthow he did gaze and gape when he came near it, for the tower hadlegs, and leapt in one bound over the steep hill, and was nowstanding as an all-powerful giant before him.  What do you want here,you tiny fly's leg, cried the giant, with a voice as if it werethundering on every side.  The tailor whimpered, I want just tolook about and see if I can earn a bit of bread for myself, inthis forest.  If that is what you are after, said the giant,you may have a place with me.  If it must be, why not.  What wagesshall I receive.  You shall hear what wages you shall have.  Everyyear three hundred and sixty-five days, and when it is leap-year,one more into the bargain.  Does that suit you.  All right,replied the tailor, and thought, in his own mind, a man must cuthis coat according to his cloth.  I will try to get away as fast asI can.At this the giant said to him, go, little ragamuffin, and fetchme a jug of water.  Had I not better bring the well itselfat once, and the spring too, asked the boaster, and went with thepitcher to the water.  What, the well and the spring too, growledthe giant in his beard, for he was somewhat of a silly dolt, andbeganto be afraid.  That knave is not a fool, he has a mandrake inhis body.  Be on your guard, old Hans, this is no serving-man foryou.  When the tailor had brought the water, the giant badehim go into the forest, and cut a couple of blocks ofwood and bring them back.  Why not the whole forest, at once,with one stroke.  The whole forest, young and old, withall that is there, both gnarled and smooth, and the well and itsspring too, growled the credulous giant in his beard, and was stillmore terrified.  The knave can do much more than bake apples, andhas a mandrake in his body.  Be on your guard, old Hans, this isno serving-man for you.  When the tailor had brought the wood, thegiant commandedhim to shoot two or three wild boars for supper.  Why notrather a thousand at one shot, and bring them all here, inquiredthe insolent tailor.  What, cried the timid giant in great terror.Let well alone to-night, and lie down to rest.The giant was so terribly alarmed that he could not close aneye all night long for thinking what would be the best way toget rid of this accursed sorcerer of a servant.  Timebrings counsel.  Next morning the giant and the tailor went to amarsh, round which stood a number of willow-trees.  Then saidthe giant, listen, tailor, seat yourself on one of thewillow-branches.  I long of all things to see if you are big enoughto bend it down.  All at once the tailor was sitting on it, holdinghis breath, and making himself heavy, so heavy that the boughbent down.  When, however, he was compelled to draw breath, ithurled him - for unfortunately he had not put his goose in hispocket - so high into the air that he never was seen again, andthis to the great delight of the giant.  If the tailor has notfallen down again, he must still be hovering about in the air.A merchant had done good business at the fair.  He had sold hiswares, and lined his money-bags with gold and silver.  Then hewanted to travel homewards, and be in his own house beforenightfall.  So he packed his trunk with the money on his horse,and rode away.At noon he rested in a town, and when he wanted to go fartherthe stable-boy brought out his horse and said, a nail iswanting, sir, in the shoe of its near hind foot.  Let it bewanting, answered the merchant.  The shoe will certainly stay onfor the six miles I have still to go.  I am in a hurry.In the afternoon, when he once more alighted and had his horsefed, the stable-boy went into the room to him and said, sir, ashoe is missing from your horse's near hind foot.  Shall I takehim to the blacksmith.  Let it be wanting, answered the man.The horse can very well hold out for the couple of miles whichremain.  I am in haste.He rode forth, but before long the horse began to limp.  It hadnot limped long before it began to stumble, and it had notstumbled long before it fell down and broke its leg.  Themerchant was forcedto leave the horse where it was, and unbuckle the trunk, take iton his back, and go home on foot.  And there he did not arriveuntil quite late at night.  And that cursed nail, said he tohimself, has caused all this disaster.The more haste the less speed.This story, my dear young folks, seems to be false, but it reallyis true, for my grandfather, from whom I have it, used always,when relating it, to say, it must be true, my son, or else noone could tell it to you.  The story is as follows.  One sundaymorning about harvest time, just as the buckwheat was in bloom,the sun was shining brightly in heaven, the east wind wasblowing warmly over the stubble-fields, the larks were singingin the air, the bees buzzing among the buckwheat, the peoplein their sunday clothes were all going to church, and all creatureswere happy, and the hedgehog was happy too.The hedgehog, however, was standing by his door with his armsakimbo, enjoying the morning breezes, and slowly trilling alittle song to himself, which was neither better nor worse thanthe songs which hedgehogs are in the habit of singing on a blessedsunday morning.  Whilst he was thus singing half aloud to himself,it suddenly occurred to him that, while his wife was washing anddrying the children, he might very well take a walk into the field,and see how his turnips were getting on.  The turnips, in fact,were close beside his house, and he and his family were accustomedto eat them, for which reason he looked upon them as his own.No sooner said thandone.  The hedgehog shut the house-door behind him, and took thepath to the field.  He had not gone very far from home, andwas just turning round the sloe-bush which stands there outside thefield, to go up into the turnip-field, when he observed the harewho had gone out on business of the same kind, namely, to visit hiscabbages.  When the hedgehog caught sight of the hare, he bade hima friendly good morning.  But the hare, who was in his own way adistinguished gentleman, and frightfully haughty, did not returnthe hedgehog's greeting, but said to him, assuming at the sametime a very contemptuous manner, how do you happen to berunning about here in the field so early in the morning.  I amtaking a walk, said the hedgehog.  A walk, said the hare, witha smile.  It seems to me that you might use your legs for a betterpurpose.  This answer made the hedgehog furiously angry, for hecan bear anything but a reference too his legs, just because theyare crooked by nature.  So now the hedgehog said to the hare, youseem to imagine that you can do more with your legs than I withmine.  That is just what I do think, said the hare.  That canbe put to the test, said the hedgehog.  I wager that if we runa race, I will outstrip you.  That is ridiculous.  You with yourshort legs, said the hare, but for my part I am willing, if youhave such a monstrous fancy for it.  What shall we wager.  Agolden louis-d'or and a bottle of brandy, said the hedgehog.  Done,said the hare.  Shake hands on it, and then we may as well beginat once.  Nay, said the hedgehog, there is no such great hurry.I am still fasting, I will go home first, and have a littlebreakfast.  In half-an-hour I will be back again at thisplace.Hereupon the hedgehog departed, for the hare was quite satisfiedwith this.  On his way the hedgehog thought to himself, the harerelies on his long legs, but I will contrive to get the betterof him.  He may be a great man, but he is a very silly fellow,and he shall pay for what he has said.  So when the hedgehogreached home, he said to his wife, wife, dress yourself quickly,you must go out to the field with me.  What is going on, then,said his wife.  I have made a wager with the hare, for a goldlouis-d'or and a bottle ofbrandy.  I am to run a race with him, and you must be present.Good heavens, husband, the wife now cried, are you not right inyour mind, have you completely lost your wits.  What can makeyou want to run a race with the hare.  Hold your tongue, woman,said the hedgehog, that is my affair.  Don't begin to discussthings which are matters for men.  Be off, dress yourself, andcome with me.  What could the hedgehog's wife do.  She was forcedto obey him, whether she liked it or not.So when they had set out on their way together, the hedgehogsaid to his wife, now pay attention to what I am going to say.Look you, I will make the long field our race-course.  The hareshall run in one furrow, and when the hare arrives at the endof the furrow on the other side of you, you must cry out to him,I am here already.Then they reached the field, and the hedgehog showed his wifeher place, and then walked up the field.  When he reached thetop, the hare was already there.  Shall we start, said thehare.  Certainly, said the hedgehog.  Then both at once.  Sosaying, each placed himself in his own furrow.  The hare counted,once, twice, thrice, and away, and went off like a whirlwinddown the field.  The hedgehog, however, only ran about threepaces, and then he crouched down in the furrow, and stayedquietly where he was.When the hare therefore arrived at full speed at the lower endof the field, the hedgehog's wife met him with the cry, I amhere already.  The hare was shocked and wondered not a little,he thought no other than that it was the hedgehog himself who wascalling to him, for the hedgehog's wife looked just like herhusband.  The hare, however, thought to himself, that has notbeen done fairly, and cried, it must be run again, let us have itagain.  And once more he went off like the wind in a storm, sothat he seemed to fly.  But the hedgehog's wife stayed quietlyin her place.  So when the hare reached the top of the field, thehedgehog himself cried out to him, I am here already.  Thehare, however, quite beside himselfwith anger, cried, it must be run again, we must have it again.All right, answered the hedgehog, for my part we'll run as oftenas you choose.  So the hare ran seventy-three times more, andthe hedgehog always held out against him, and every time thehare reached either the top or the bottom, either the hedgehogor his wife said, I am here already.At the seventy-fourth time, however, the hare could no longerreach the end.  In the middle of the field he fell to theground, blood streamed out of his mouth, and he lay dead onthe spot.  But the hedgehog took the louis-d'or which he hadwon and the bottle of brandy, called his wife out of the furrow,and both went home together in great delight, and if they are notdead, they are living there still.This is how it happened that the hedgehog made the hare run raceswith him on the heath of buxtehude - buxtehude is a village nearhamburg - till he died, and since that time no hare has everhad any fancy for running races with a buxtehude hedgehog.The moral of this story is, firstly, that no one, however greathe may be, should permit himself to jest at any one beneath him,even if he be only a hedgehog.  And, secondly, it teaches, thatwhen a man marries, he should take a wife in his own position,who looks just as he himself looks.  So whosoever is ahedgehog let him see to it that his wife is a hedgehog also,and so forth.There was once upon a time a far-sighted, crafty peasant whosetricks were much talked about.  The best story, however, ishow he once got hold of the devil, and made a fool of him.The peasant had one day been working in his field, and astwilight had set in, was making ready for the journey home, whenhe saw a heap of burning coals in the middle of his field,and when,full of astonishment, he went up to it, a little black devilwas sitting on the live coals.  Are you sitting upon a treasure,said the peasant.  Yes, in truth, replied the devil, on a treasurewhich contains more gold and silver than you have ever seen inyour life.  The treasure lies in my field and belongs to me, saidthe peasant.  It is yours, answered the devil, if you will fortwo years give me one half of everything your field produces.Money I have enough, but I have a desire for the fruits of theearth.  The peasant agreed to the bargain.  In order, however,that no dispute may arise about the division, said he, everythingthat is above ground shall belong to you, and what is under theearth to me.  The devil was quite satisfied with that, but thecunning peasant had sown turnips.Now when the time for harvest came, the devil appeared andwanted to take away his crop.  But he found nothing but theyellow withered leaves, while the peasant, full of delight,was digging up his turnips.  You have had the best of it for once,said the devil, but the next time that won't do.  What growsabove ground shall be yours, and what is under it, mine.  I amwilling, replied the peasant.  But when the time came to sow, hedid not again sow turnips, but wheat.  The grain became ripe,and the peasant went into the field and cut the full stalksdown to the ground.  When the devil came, he found nothing butthe stubble, and went away in a fury down into a cleft in therocks.  That is the way to cheat the devil, said thepeasant, and went and fetched away the treasure.George one day said to his little chickens, come into theparlor and enjoy yourselves, and pick up the bread-crumbson the table.  Your mistress has gone out to pay some visits.Then the chickens said, no, no, we will not go.  Ifthe mistress gets to know it, she will beat us.  George said,she willknow nothing about it.  So come.  After all, she never givesyou anything good.  Then the chickens again said, nay, nay, wemust let it alone.  We must not go.  But george let them haveno peace until at last they went, and got on the table, and ateup the bread-crumbs with all their might.  But at that very momentthe mistress came, and seized the stick in great haste, andbeat them and treated them very harshly.  And when they wereoutside the house, the chickens said to george, do, do, do, do,do, you see.  Then george laughed and said, didn't, didn't, didn't,I expect it.  So they just had to run away.A rich farmer was one day standing in his yard inspecting hisfields and gardens.  The corn was growing up vigorouslyand the fruit-trees were heavily laden with fruit.  The grainof the year before still lay in such immense heaps in the loft thatthe rafters could hardly bear it.  Then he went into the stable,where were well-fed oxen, fat cows, and horses bright aslooking-glass.  At length he went back into his sitting-room, andcast a glance at the iron chest in which his money lay.Whilst he was thus standing surveying his riches, all at once therewas a loud knock close by him.  The knock was not at the door ofhis room, but at the door of his heart.  It opened, and he hearda voice which said to him, have you done good to your family withit.  Have you considered the necessities of the poor.  Have youshared your bread with the hungry.  Have you been contented withwhat you have, or did you always desire to have more.  The heartwas not slow in answering, I have been hard and pitiless, and havenever shown any kindness to my own family.  If a beggar came, Iturned away my eyes from him.  I have not troubled myself aboutGod, but have thought only of increasing my wealth.  If everythingwhich the sky covers had been mine own, I should still not havehad enough.When he was aware of this answer he was greatly alarmed, hisknees began to tremble, and he was forced to sit down.Then there was another knock, but the knock was at the door ofhis room.  It was his neighbor, a poor man who had a number ofchildren whom he could no longer satisfy with food.  I know, thoughtthe poor man, that my neighbor is rich, but he is as hard as he isrich.  I don't believe he will help me, but my children arecrying for bread, so I will venture it.  He said to the rich man,you do not readily give away anything that is yours, but I standhere like one who feels the water rising above his head.  Mychildren are starving, lend me four measures of corn.  The rich manlooked at him long, and then the first sunbeam of mercy began tomelt away a drop of the ice of greediness.  I will not lend youfour measures, he answered.  I will make you a present of eight,but you must fulfil one condition.  What am I to do, said the poorman.  When I am dead, you shall watch for three nights by mygrave.  The peasant was disturbed in his mind at this request, butin the need in which he was, he would have consented to anything.He accepted, therefore, and carried the corn home with him.It seemed as if the rich man had foreseen what was about to happen,for when three days were gone by, he suddenly dropped down dead.No one knew exactly how it came to pass, but no one grieved for him.When he was buried, the poor man remembered his promise.  Hewould willingly have been released from it, but he thought,after all, he acted kindly by me.  I have fed my hungry childrenwith his corn, and even if that were not the case, where I haveonce given my promise I must keep it.  At nightfall he went intothe churchyard, and seated himself on the grave-mound.  Everythingwas quiet, only the moon appeared above the grave, and frequentlyan owl flew past and uttered her melancholy cry.  When the sunrose, the poor man betook himself in safety to his home, and in thesame manner the second night passed quietly by.  On the eveningof the third day he felt a strange uneasiness, it seemed to him thatsomething was about to happen.  When he went out he saw, by thechurchyard-wall, a man whom he had never seen before.  Hewas no longer young, had scars on his face, and his eyes lookedsharply and eagerly around.  He was entirely covered with an oldcloak, and nothing was visible but his great riding-boots.  Whatare you looking for here, the peasant asked.  Are you not afraidof the lonely churchyard.I am looking for nothing, he answered, and I am afraid ofnothing.  I am like the youngster who went forth to learn how toshudder, and had his labor for his pains, but got the king'sdaughter to wife and great wealth with her, only I have remainedpoor.  I am nothing but a paid-off soldier, and I mean to passthe night here, because I have no other shelter.  If you are withoutfear, said the peasant, stay with me, and help me to watch thatgrave there.To keep watch is a soldier's business, he replied, whatever wefall in with here, whether it be good or bad, we will share itbetween us.  The peasant agreed to this, and they seated themselveson the grave together.All was quiet until midnight, when suddenly a shrill whistlingwas heard in the air, and the two watchers perceived the evil onestanding bodily before them.  Be off, you scoundrels, cried he tothem, the man who lies in that grave belongs to me.  I want totake him, and if you don't go away I will wring your necks.  Sirwith the red feather, said the soldier, you are not my captain,I have no need to obey you, and I have not yet learned what fearis.  Go away, we shall stay sitting here.The devil thought to himself, money is the best means with whichto lay hold of these two vagabonds.  So he began to play asofter tune, and asked quite kindly, if they would not accepta bag of money, and go home with it.  That is worth listeningto, answered the soldier, but one bag of gold won't serve us.  Ifyou will give as much as will go into one of my boots, we will quitthe field for you and go away.I have not so much as that about me, said the devil, but I willfetch it.  In the neighboring town lives a money-changer who is agood friend of mine, and will readily advance it to me.  When thedevil had vanished the soldier took his left boot off, and said,we will soon pull the charcoal-burner's nose for him, just give meyour knife, comrade.  He cut the sole off the boot, and put itin the high grass near the grave on the edge of a hole that washalf over-grown.  That will do, said he.  Now the chimney-sweepmay come.They both sat down and waited, and it was not long before thedevil returned with a small bag of gold in his hand.  Just pourit in, said the soldier, raising up the boot a little, but thatwon't be enough.The black one shook out all that was in the bag.  The gold fellthrough, and the boot remained empty.  Stupid devil, cried thesoldier, it won't do.  Didn't I say so at once.  Go back again, andbring more.  The devil shook his head, went, and in an hour'stime came with a much larger bag under his arm.  Now pour it in,cried the soldier, but I doubt the boot will be full.  The goldclinked as it fell, but the boot remained empty.  The devil lookedin himself with his burning eyes, and convinced himself of thetruth.  You have shamefully big calves to your legs, cried he,and made a wry face.  Did you think, replied the soldier, that I hada cloven foot like  you.  Since when have you been so stingy.  Seethat you get more gold together, or our bargain will come tonothing.  The wicked one went off again.  This time he stayedaway longer, and when at length he appeared he was panting underthe weight of a sack which lay on his shoulders.  He emptied it intothe boot, which was just as far from being filled as before.  Hebecame furious, and was just going to tear the boot out of thesoldier's hands, but at that moment the first ray of the risingsun broke forth from the sky, and the evil spirit fled away withloud shrieks.  The poor soul was saved.The peasant wished to divide the gold, but the soldier said,give what falls to my lot to the poor, I will come with you to yourcottage, and together we will live in rest and peace on whatremains, as long as God is pleased to permit.A soldier who is afraid of nothing, troubles himself aboutnothing.  One of this kind had received his discharge, andas he had learnt no trade and could earn nothing, he traveledabout and begged alms of kind people.  He had an old rain-coaton his back, and a pair of riding-boots of buffalo-leather whichwere still left to him.  One day he was walking he knew not where,straight out into the open country, and at length came to a forest.He did not know where he was, but saw sitting on the trunk of atree, which had been cut down, a man who was well dressed andwore a green shooting-coat.  The soldier shook hands with him, satdown on the grass by his side, and stretched out his legs.  I seeyou have good boots on, which are well blacked, said he to thehuntsman, but if you had to travel about as I have, they wouldnot last long.  Look at mine, they are of buffalo-leather, andhave been worn for a long time, but in them I can go through thickand thin.  After a while the soldier got up and said, I can stayno longer, hunger drives me onwards, but, brother brightboots,where does this road lead to.  I don't know that myself, answeredthe huntsman, I have lost my way in the forest.  Then you are in thesame plight as I, said the soldier.  Birds of a feather flocktogether, let us remain together, and seek our way.  The huntsmansmiled a little, and they walked on further and further, untilnight fell.  We do not get out of the forest, said the soldier,but there in the distance I see a light shining.  There we mightfind something to eat.  They found a stone house, knocked at thedoor, and an old woman opened it.  We are looking for quarters forthe night, said the soldier, and some lining for our stomachs, formine is as empty asan old knapsack.  You cannot stay here, answered the old woman.This is a robbers, house, and you would do wisely to get awaybefore they come home, or you will be lost.  It won't be so badas that, answered the soldier, I have not had a mouthful for twodays, and whether I am murdered here or die of hunger in theforest is all the same to me.  I shall come in.  The huntsmanwould not follow, but the soldier drew him in with him by thesleeve.  Come, my dear brother, we shall not come to an end soquickly as that.  The old woman had pity on them and said, creepin here behind the stove, and if they leave anything, I will giveit to you on the sly when they are asleep.  Scarcely were they inthe corner before twelve robbers came bursting in, seated themselvesat the table which was already laid, and vehemently demanded somefood.  The old woman brought in some great dishes of roast meat,and the robbers enjoyed that thoroughly.  When the soldier smelledthe food, he said to the huntsman, I cannot hold out anylonger, I shall seat myself at the table, and eat with them.  Youwill bring us to destruction, said the huntsman, and held him backby the arm.  But the soldier began to cough loudly.  When therobbers heard that, they threw away their knives and forks, leaptup, and discovered the two who were behind the stove.  Aha,gentlemen, are you in the corner, cried they.  What are you doinghere.  Have you been sent as spies.  Wait a while, and you shalllearn how tofly on a dry bough.  But do be civil, said the soldier, I amhungry, give me something to eat, and then you can do what youlike with me.  The robbers were astonished, and the captain said,I see that you have no fear.  Well, you shall have some food,but after that you must die.  We shall see, said the soldier, andseated himself at the table, and began to cut away valiantly at theroast meat.  Brother brightboots, come and eat, cried he to thehuntsman.  You must be as hungry as I am, and cannot have betterroast meat at home, but the huntsman would not eat.  The robberslooked at the soldier in astonishment, and said, the rascal usesno ceremony.  After a while he said, I have had enough food, nowget me something good to drink.  The chief of the robbers wasin the mood to humor him in this also, and called to the oldwoman, bring a bottle out of the cellar, and mind it be of thebest.  The soldier drew the cork out with a loud noise, and thenwent with the bottle to the huntsman and said, watch this, brother,and you shall see something that will surprise you.  I am now goingto drink the health of the whole clan.  Then he brandished thebottle over the heads of the robbers, and cried, long life toyou all, but with your mouths open and your right hands liftedup, and then he drank a hearty draught.  Scarcely were thewords said than they all sat motionless as if made of stone,and their mouths were open and their right hands stretched up inthe air.  The huntsman said to the soldier, I see that you areacquainted with tricks of another kind, but now come and let usgo home.  Oho, my dear brother, but that would be marchingaway far too soon.  We have conquered the enemy, and must firsttake the booty.  Those men there are sitting fast, and are openingtheir mouths with astonishment, but they will not be allowed tomove until I permit them.  Come, eat and drink.  The old womanhad to bring another bottle of the best wine, and the soldier wouldnot stir until he had eaten enough to last for three days.  Atlast when day came, he said, now it is time to strike our tents,and in order that our march may be a short one, the old womanshall show us the nearest way to the town.
When they had arrived there, he went to his old comrades, andsaid, out in the forest I have found a nest full of gallows,birds, come with me and we will take it.  The soldier led them,and said to the huntsman, you must go back again with me to seehow they flutter when we seize them by the feet.  He placedthe men round about the robbers, and then he took the bottle,drank a mouthful, brandished it above them, and cried, long lifeto you all.  Instantly they all regained the power of movement,but were thrown down and bound hand and foot with cords.Then the soldier ordered them to be thrown into a cart as ifthey had been so many sacks, and said, now drive them straightto prison.  The huntsman, however, took one of the men asideand gave him another commission as well.
Brother brightboots, said the soldier, we have safely routedthe enemy and been well fed, now we will quietly walk behindthem as if we were stragglers.  When they approached the town,the soldier saw a crowd of people pouring through the gate ofthe town who were raising loud cries of joy, and waving greenboughs in the air.  Then he saw that the entire body-guard wascoming up.  What can this mean, said he to the huntsman.
Don't you know, he replied, that the king has for a long timebeen absent from his kingdom, and that today he is returning,and every one is going to meet him.  But where is the king,said the soldier.  I do not see him.  Here he is, answeredthe huntsman, I am the king, and have announced my arrival.
Then he opened his hunting-coat, and his royal garments werevisible.  The soldier was alarmed, and fell on his knees andbegged him to forgive him for having in his ignorance treatedhim as an equal, and spoken to him by such a name.  But theking shook hands with him, and said, you are a brave soldier,and have saved my life.  You shall never again be in want,I will take care of you.  And if ever you would like to eata piece of roast meat, as good as that in the robber's house,come to the royal kitchen.  But if you would drink a health,you must first ask my permission.
In the winter time, when deep snow lay on the ground, a poor boy was forced to go out on a sledge to fetch wood.  When he had gathered it together, and packed it, he wished, as he was so frozen with cold, not to go home at once, but to light a fire andwarm himself a little.  So he scraped away the snow, and as he was thus clearing the ground, he found a tiny golden key.  Hereupon he thought that where the key was, the lock must be also, and dug in the ground and found an iron chest.  "If thekey does but fit it!"  thought he; "no doubt there are preciousthings in that little box."  He searched, but no keyhole wasthere.  At last he discovered one, but so small that it washardly visible.  He tried it, and the key fitted it exactly.Then he turned it once round, and now we must wait until he hasquite unlocked it and opened the lid, and then we shall learnwhat wonderful things were lying in that box.